Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403

Creating value through returns management: Exploring the marketing–operations interface

Diane A. Mollenkopfa,∗, Robert Frankelb,1, Ivan Russoc,2 aDepartment of Marketing & Logistics, 323 Stokely Management Center, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996-0530, USA bDepartment of Marketing & Logistics, Coggin College of Business, University of North Florida, 4567 St. Johns Bluff Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224-267 5, USA cDepartment of Business Economics, University of Verona, Via dell’Artigliere 19, Verona 37129, Italy article info

Keywords:Cross-functional integrationCustomer valueReturns managementMarketing–operations interfaceabstract

Managing the return ﬂow of product is increasingly recognized as a strategically important activity that involves decisions and actions within and across ﬁrms. We focus speciﬁcally on returns management atthe marketing–operations interface, by utilizing the conceptualization of customer value and its relateddrivers. In order to explore the phenomenon of returns management across a multi-disciplinary, man-agerial spectrum, a qualitative research methodology relying on individual managers’ perceptions waschosen to generate depth of understanding given the limited current understanding of the research topicunder consideration. Our results suggest that functional integration at the marketing–operations inter-face can lead to better alignment of corporate resources and thus create higher levels of customer value.We also found the external business environment to impact how and why a ﬁrm creates customer valuethrough the returns management process. Overall, our results suggest that when returns management isrecognized as a matter of a ﬁrm’s competitiveness, the joint role of operations and marketing is imperativeto success.
1. Introduction
Consider this scenario, in which a marketing manager has just authorized a signiﬁcant return of product from a major retail cus-tomer:
Operations Manager : So now we’ve got to arrange the transport, receive the product, inspect and re-palletizethe product; repackage and re-label thatwhich we can still sell, ﬁgure out what to dowith the rest, and oh yeah, now we’ve got tointegrate the inventory back into the systemand ﬁgure out how to value it.
Operations Manager : Let me show you how much that will cost ....
Our proﬁtability will be reduced by [cites alarge ﬁgure].
Marketing Manager : I had no idea ....
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 865 974 1645; fax: +1 865 974 1932.
E-mail addresses: mollenkopf@utk.edu (D.A. Mollenkopf), rfrankel@unf.edu
(R. Frankel), ivan.russo@univr.it (I. Russo).
1Tel.: +1 904 620 1346; fax: +1 904 620 2782.
2Tel.: +39 45 802 8161; fax: +39 45 802 8488.This scenario represents a paraphrased but very real dialogue that occurred recently in a large, global consumer appliance manu-facturer (that became the focus of this research). On the positiveside, the marketing and operations managers were conversingabout a return situation, recognizing that both functions areinvolved in handling this customer-generated product issue. Onthe negative side, this dialogue represents lost opportunity for theﬁrm in question, which is now dealing with reduced proﬁtabil-ity. Equally important is the opportunity the company may haveforegone with respect to managing the customer relationship.
Product returns can present a signiﬁcant challenge for manu- facturing ﬁrms whose primary objective is usually geared towardsproducing and selling products to customers. The impact of returnsis ignored, or at minimum, not well-understood in many ﬁrms. Inothers, returns are often considered just a necessary cost-of-doingbusiness ( Blackburn et al., 2004 ). With such a perspective, ﬁrms focus on cost minimization at an operational level, missing oppor-tunities to recapture value for themselves and their customers, andbuild customer loyalty ( Mollenkopf et al., 2007a ). Managing costs as well as customer relationships highlights the strategic role that both marketing and operations functions can perform in returnsmanagement. In today’s highly competitive environment, proactiveﬁrms seek ways to differentiate themselves in the eyes of their cus-tomers. Understanding what their customers value enables ﬁrms tomove away from price competition alone and differentiate them-selves from competitors in other ways ( Ulaga, 2003 ). Although
0272-6963/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. doi: 10.1016/j.jom.2010.11.004392 D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 customer value is often considered a marketing concept, Flint and
Mentzer (2000) demonstrate the important role that operations plays in creating customer value.
Research interest in returns management and the reverse ﬂow of product across the supply chain has been gaining attention withscholars. Reverse logistics, product recovery, remanufacturing, andclosed-loop supply chain issues are being increasingly addressed(Guide and van Wassenhove, 2006; Kocabasoglu et al., 2007; Rogers et al., 2002 ). However, the majority of research tends to focus only on a single disciplinary approach, or remains focused on tactical and operational aspects such as production planning, inventory man- agement or reverse logistics. Notably, Rubio et al. (2008) call for research that focuses more strategically in order to develop a frame- work for future research.
In this paper, we highlight returns management issues within a single global appliance manufacturer as it deals with its retailcustomers, focusing on two subsidiaries so as to capture varia-tion in operating environments that may inﬂuence the way inwhich returns from retail customers are managed. We do notmake a distinction between product characterized as consumer-originated returns (which could include defective product and/orbuyer’s remorse) or store-originated returns (unsold product beingreturned from the retail customer to the appliance ﬁrm). Both typesof returns move from the retailer to the appliance manufacturer.Our focus is on the coordination of cross-functional decisions andactivities that take place between the appliance ﬁrm’s marketingand the operations managers in these return situations. Thus, thepurpose of this paper is twofold. First, with regard to the returnsmanagement process, we investigate the potential relationshipbetween cross-functional integration at the marketing–operationsinterface (M-OI) and customer value. Second, we investigate howexternal factors affect, if at all, the returns management processand value creation.
Our research contributes to the literature in several respects.
Speciﬁcally, we extend previous work addressing the impact ofM-OI on the creation of customer value ( Sawhney and Piper,
2002 ) through our extension on returns management. Our focus represents a previously unexplored perspective of the M-OI, andhighlights the importance of aligning cross-functional returns man-agement activities and the related impact on both ﬁrm performanceand competitive positioning. Finally, we expand the understandingof a diverse set of challenges and related solution within a ﬁrm’sreturns management process.
The following section provides the theoretical background and foundation of our research, leading to our research propositions. Adiscussion of our methodology then precedes our research ﬁndingsand discussion. Finally, we address limitations and future researchsuggestions.
2. Background
This section positions returns management as a cross-functional process that spans both the marketing and the operations activitieswithin a ﬁrm. Discussions of functional alignment and customervalue are provided as theoretical grounding to a conceptual frame-work and research propositions.
2.1. Cross-functional integration at the marketing–operations interface
Functional integration across the two domains refers to how operations and marketing communicate and coordinate their activ-ities in order to align them towards common goals ( Bharadwaj et al., 2007 ). Scholars have long-addressed the need for mar- keting and operations to do more than ‘co-exist,’ ( Abernathy,1976; Shapiro, 1977 ), and emphasize the need for cross-functional integration for enhanced business performance. Although theimportance of managing the interface between these two func-tions is widely acknowledged, coordination remains problematicdue to their differing roles, orientations and reward systems withinthe organization ( Malhotra and Sharma, 2002 ). Most recently, the demand–supply integration framework ( Esper et al., 2010 ), empha- sizes the need for extensive integration of the demand processes ofmarketing/sales activities and the supply processes of operations,in order to most successfully manage a supply chain that createscustomer value.
Cross-functional integration at the M-OI has been addressed in the operations management literature by many authors. In fact, theJournal of Operations Management (JOM ) has dedicated two spe- cial issues to the topic ( Berry et al., 1991; Malhotra and Sharma,
2002 ). While marketing–operations integration is usually advo- cated for its positive impact on ﬁrm performance, integration isnot easy ( Swink and Song, 2007 ); poor execution can exacerbate the “great divide” between functions ( Drucker, 1973 ).Sawhney and
Piper (2002) recently moved the discussion from purely a focus on supplier ﬁrm performance, to incorporate the role of functionalintegration at the M-OI as a means to create customer value.
2.2. Returns management as a cross-functional process
Malhotra and Sharma (2002) developed a marketing– operations integration framework in which they identiﬁedprocesses that span the marketing and operations functions thatcontribute to organizational performance. The processes are alsopresented along a continuum from strategic to tactical. This is avaluable contribution to framing research in the area of the M-OI.However, the framework addresses only forward supply chain
ﬂows; missing from this framework is any reference to the reverse
ﬂows that companies must deal with when products are returnedfrom customers.
Rogers et al. (2002) argue that returns management is an impor- tant supply chain management process spanning functional andﬁrm boundaries across the supply chain. Within an organization,activities related to returns management include return authoriza-tion; reverse logistics; gatekeeping; avoidance; product recovery,disposition and processing; and crediting. These activities exem-plify the many facets of the M-OI within the returns managementprocess.
With regard to return authorization and subsequent reverse logistics ﬂows, sales or marketing personnel are often charged withauthorizing a return. Yet, the decision to accept product returnsfrom a customer has implications for operations personnel, whomanage the reverse logistics activities of physically transportingthe product back to the company ( Mollenkopf and Closs, 2005 ). The volume and quality of products authorized for return will impactstafﬁng needs at the company’s distribution centers or factories(Guide and van Wassenhove, 2001 ).
Gatekeeping refers to the ability to limit the amount or types of returns ( Rogers et al., 2002 ). For example, some products may be more costly to return and process than they are worth. In such cases,customers might be encouraged to keep the product (while stillreceiving credit) or destroy-in-ﬁeld so as to avoid operational costsfor the supplier. Gatekeeping may also involve contractual speciﬁ-cations, especially with regard to promotional inventories. In suchcases, marketing may pre-arrange with customers the amount orconditions within which promotional products may be returned.Such forethought can have positive impact on operational costsfor the supplying ﬁrm. Effective gatekeeping requires an under-standing of operational costs, so that marketing and operations canjointly determine which products should (not) enter the reverseﬂow.D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 393
Returns avoidance ( Rogers et al., 2002 ) refers to opportuni- ties to prevent returns from occurring. Operations plays a role inavoiding returns, through efforts to improve product quality (i.e.,eliminating defective product design and/or packaging); confor-mance to legislative mandates; more responsive production anddelivery systems to improve inventory balance and placement inthe market; or aligned deliveries to meet the timing of demand(i.e., replenishment orders received at the end of a selling seasondo the retailer little good, and invariably will end up as returns tothe supplier).
Disposition and processing refers to the inspection activities, decisions to resell, refurbish/remanufacture, disassemble for partsor to scrap items that are returned from customers. Product recov-ery becomes an important goal for operations managers chargedwith recapturing product that can be refurbished or remanufac-tured, or recapturing parts that can be used for spares in theservice support function ( Guide and van Wassenhove, 2001 ). These activities are often labor-intensive, and require high levels of prod-uct knowledge and expertise, as well as joint cross-functionaldecision-making. Disposition may be constrained by factors suchas geographic separation of production and sales; wide geographicdispersion of markets; policy conﬂicts between production andsales; or an inability to distinguish between the cause(s) of returns(Rogers et al., 2002 ). Additionally, the ability and speed of issuing credit to a customer is important to marketing/sales personnel, butoften controlled by the operations personnel and their ability toprocess returns in a timely and accurate manner.
Mollenkopf et al. (2007b) provide evidence of the cross- functional nature of returns management across strategic andoperational levels within a ﬁrm. At the strategic level, an organiza-tion must develop policies, processes and structures to handle thereverse ﬂow of product, information and ﬁnances. At the opera-tional level, the returns management process involves the physicalﬂow of product, information and ﬁnances ( Rogers et al., 2002 ).
2.3. Alignment
Many businesses fail to achieve their strategic business objec- tives, due in part to the inability of functions such as marketing andmanufacturing to jointly develop consistent strategies; this failureis called a lack of alignment ( Berry et al., 1999 ). Other authors have referred to alignment as cross-functional harmony ( Calantone et al.,
2002 ) or interface harmony ( Hausman et al., 2002 ).
Malhotra and Sharma (2002) identiﬁed a number of future research objectives regarding the exploration and impact of the M-OI; their ﬁrst suggestion addressed the need to align the goals andobjectives of marketing and manufacturing functions, with speciﬁcattention to be paid to how ﬁrms actually align the objectives ofthese two functions to maximize overall ﬁrm proﬁts. Such investi-gation and discussion need not be restricted to only products, butcould well encompass service provision or a combination of productand service provision. Contemporary discussion of demand–supplyintegration ( Esper et al., 2010 ) re-states an earlier contention that
“marketing strategy embodies the management of demand, i.e.,identifying, understanding, and creating need-satisfying productsand services, and operations strategy concerns the management ofsupply, i.e., production and delivery of products and services” ( Roth and van der Velde, 1991 , p. 304).
As such, when correctly aligned, the ﬁrm’s operational capa- bilities can proactively meet marketing’s objectives to generatedemand and retain existing customers. Operational capacity andresources also need to be allocated to handling return productsand necessary refurbishment, recognizing that productivity andefﬁciencies are often lower for returns processing due to erraticvolume ﬂows and increased handling. When properly conceivedand executed, returns management can become part of a successfulcustomer relationship management program, since it is dependent upon operational capabilities to support the marketing function.Prior research suggests that ﬁrms with higher levels of functionalintegration are more adaptive and proactive in managing returnseffectively ( Mollenkopf et al., 2007b ). While focused on reverse
ﬂows rather than forward ﬂows, the objective remains to generatevalue for the ﬁrm and its customers.
2.4. Customer value through returns management
The importance of customer value is particularly relevant when
ﬁrms ﬁnd that product innovation and quality management aloneno longer provide sufﬁcient competitive advantage ( Sharman,
1984; Woodruff, 1997 ). Firms that shift to a customer value focus complemented by appropriate resources and capabilities will bebest positioned for achieving superior performance and compet-itive advantage ( Hunt and Morgan, 1995; Jüttner et al., 2007;
Sawhney and Piper, 2002; Slater, 1997 ). The notion of customer value originated in the marketing literature ( Slater, 1997; Ulaga,
2003; Woodruff, 1997 ); however, other authors are shifting the dialogue to include operations as a key player in the creation of cus-tomer value ( Flint and Mentzer, 2000; Sawhney and Piper, 2002 ).
The returns management literature has not been explicit in addressing issues of customer value; however, Rogers et al. (2002) and Mollenkopf et al. (2007b) implicitly suggest aspects of value creation through the returns management process. Attempting tobuild on their prior work, as well as that of Flint and Mentzer (2000) and Ulaga (2003) , we deﬁne six categories of customer value in the returns management process as shown in Table 1 . The following paragraphs overview each of the six categories.
The returns management policy in place at a ﬁrm can affect customer value in the way it guides marketers and operations per-sonnel to facilitate the return ﬂow of product from customers.Returns avoidance, gatekeeping, disposition and asset recoveryhave been previously discussed, and represent means for man-aging the customer relationship. Additionally, removing outdatedproduct from retail shelves helps the retailer keep “fresh” prod-uct, which is typically higher margin product, on the shelves(Mollenkopf and Closs, 2005 ). Yet doing so requires active inven- tory management and reverse ﬂows of product on the part of thesupplier ﬁrm.
Effective returns processing can contribute to a customer’s per- ception of value in dealing with a supplier ﬁrm. Much of the valuecreated through these activities relates to the physical ﬂow ofreturned product, and the timeliness and accuracy of the opera-tions group in processing such products. Linked to the operationalprocessing is the ability of the accounting group to reconcile phys-ical ﬂows with ﬁnancial and information ﬂows in order to issuecredit in a timely and accurate manner ( Stock and Mulki, 2009 ).
Product quality can affect a customer’s sense of value in mul- tiple ways. Ultimately, consumers or end users will evaluate thevalue they receive from the use of a product, and will evalu-ate the cost/beneﬁts associated with the price paid ( Bowman and
Ambrosini, 2000; Gronroos, 2008 ). Yet, in a B2B context, retailers are also affected by a supplier ﬁrm’s product quality. Poor qualityproducts will create excessive return situations for retailers, creat-ing operational and proﬁtability concerns for them. Similarly, poorpackaging quality can induce transit damage or product degrada-tion when in storage or on the retail shelf. These quality problemsmake selling the product difﬁcult for the retailer (i.e., loss of con-sumer purchases and/or store loyalty), and risk shrinking retailersales and/or margins. Thus, retailers may perceive customer valuethrough supplier efforts to certify product quality and to ensurecompliance with industry or regulatory standards.
Service support provides a process perspective to the quality dis- cussion. Retailers discern value from suppliers’ efforts to keep them394 D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403
Value drivers adapted from Flint and Mentzer (2000), Rogers et al. (2002) ,Ulaga
(2003) and Mollenkopf et al. (2007b) . informed as to order and delivery status, timeliness and accuracy of deliveries in the forward ﬂow of products. They may also perceivevalue in information sharing relating to the returns ﬂow and thetiming and status of return ‘orders’; 3rd party logistics providerswhich supply efﬁcient and cost-effective service; clarity and con-sistency in how the return process is exercised; and the provisionof problem solving capabilities with respect to the aforementionedissues ( Moller and Torronen, 2003 ).
Personal interactions between supplier and customer ﬁrms is important in creating customer value ( Flint and Mentzer, 2000;
Ulaga, 2003 ). This is particularly true in return situations, which can be fraught with complications and problems; lack of trust andfrustration can frequently arise. Retailers often don’t want to spendtime on returns because such activities take away from their sell-ing objectives. Thus, strong communication and problem-solvingapproaches on the part of the supplier, along with helpful attitudes,can help transform a non-value-adding activity into a more neutralactivity. Problem solving approaches that help minimize the needfor returns could go even farther in creating relationship value fora supplier’s customers.
Supplier “know -how ” is another means to create customer value when dealing with returns. Knowledge of both the supply marketand the customer’s market can help the supplier provide appropri-ate levels of inventory in the marketplace; an understanding of thecustomer’s business and the end consumer can help the suppliertailor returns policies that help the customer achieve its own com-mercial goals. Value can be created by innovative ideas (beyondproducts and services) such as a variety of terms of sale, and/or pricing program options that both inform and clarify the impact ofcustomer behaviors. Relatedly, suppliers that recognize “cost” asmore than just the retailer’s purchase price can assist retailers tomore effectively manage their operating costs. Suppliers can alsoeducate retailers with respect to the true cost of returns, which is acomprehensive formulation that goes far beyond the lost revenueof a returned product ( Tibben-Lembke, 1998 ). Finally, a supplier’s ability to measure its performance can beneﬁt the customer byreducing the cost of processing a return, as well as the opportunitycosts related to lost selling time and/or loss of customer goodwill.
2.5. Customer value framework
In this section we present a conceptual framework to guide our research on returns management. Similar to Browning and Heath
(2009) , the purpose of the framework is not meant to be “proven” in the sense of hypothesis testing, but rather to provide a “focus-ing proposition” as we began our ﬁeldwork ( Stuart et al., 2002; Yin,
2003 ). Because our approach is designed primarily to extend previ- ous work by Sawhney and Piper (2002) , and to gain understanding, we provide an explicit, up front statement of our intentions. Relat-edly, as per Stuart et al. (2002) , our statement utilizes research propositions to guide the research process.
Sawhney and Piper (2002) found support for a direct relation- ship between M-OI effectiveness and customer value within theshort-term capacity management process. We explore the relation-ship between M-OI and customer value within the returns context(see Fig. 1 ). Additionally, rather than proposing a direct relation- ship between M-OI and customer value, we include the interveningrole of functional alignment as the bridge (i.e., the “how”) betweencross-functional integration at the M-OI and customer value. Thislogic is based on the need to align functional goals to maximize ﬁrmperformance ( Malhotra and Sharma, 2002; Roth and van der Velde,
1991 ). Thus, we propose:
RP1 The stronger the functional integration at the marketing–operations interface, the better the alignment ofcorporate resources with respect to the returns managementprocess .
RP2 The stronger the alignment of resources with respect to returns management, the higher the level of customer value created .
Another extension we make to the M-OI — customer value framework is the inclusion of the ﬁrm’s external environment. Thisinclusion is based on the accepted logic of “ﬁt” between an orga-nization’s strategy, structure and environment ( Venkatraman and
Camillus, 1984 ).O’Leary-Kelly and Flores (2002) emphasize that the relationship between functional integration and organizationalperformance is moderated by a ﬁrm’s strategy and its environment.Successful organizations can be viewed as those that most efﬁ-ciently interact with their environments; of particular importanceis the need to understand the ways in which organizations adapt to,or otherwise interact with, their environment ( Day and Wensley,
1983; McDaniel and Kolari, 1987 ). Strategically matching or align- ing organizational resources with the organization’s context, andespecially to environmental opportunities and threats, is a majortask for decision makers ( Miles and Snow, 1978 ). As such, the role of the “context” or “environment” in which ﬁrms operate has receiveda great deal of attention both in strategic management research andin organizational theory ( Wagner and Bode, 2008 ). Considerations of the external environment, relative to the returns managementprocess and particularly the M-OI, are particularly evident withrespect to the marketplace structure and the customer base. Alsoimportant is the regulatory and legal structure of supply chain lawsand policies (i.e., product traceability and/or compliance, recyclingD.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 395
Fig. 1. Customer value framework. and waste removal) ( Mollenkopf et al., 2007b ). Thus, we suggest the following propositions:
RP3 External environmental factors will moderate the impact of func- tional integration on the alignment of corporate resources withrespect to the returns management process .
RP4 External environmental factors will moderate the impact of the internal alignment of corporate resources on the level of customervalue created .
3. Methodology
The nature of the current research was both exploratory and conﬁrmatory, similar to other case study research logic ( Ellram et al., 2008 ). From a conﬁrmatory perspective, our intent was to assess a customer value framework within a returns managementcontext. Second, we wanted to go beyond Sawhney and Piper’s
(2002) customer value approach, to understand the role of other factors such as internal alignment and environmental business fac-tors as they relate to a ﬁrm’s ability to create value for its customers.
Exploring returns management across a multi-disciplinary spec- trum and from a managerial perspective, our case study approachis in line with Malhotra and Sharma’s (2002) call for in-depth case analysis and detailed interviews with marketing and oper-ations managers when researching complex phenomena acrossthe M-OI. Because operations and supply chain management aredynamic ﬁelds, with new practices continually developing, case-based research provides an appropriate methodology for studyingemergent practices ( Boyer and Swink, 2008; Meredith, 1998 ). Like its quantitative cousins, case-based methodology must be guidedby the same overall principles of rigor, and follow well-deﬁnedrules of evidence and proof, as do the more traditional rational-ist methods so commonly employed in operations managementresearch ( Closs et al., 2008; McCutcheon and Meredith, 1993; Wu and Choi, 2005; Yin, 2003 ).
Thus, in seeking to better understand cross-functional manage- ment of returns, we adopted an in-depth case-study approach of asingle ﬁrm that we call “Action Appliance.” The single-ﬁrm designis rationalized as the organization studied provides revelatory evi-dence of the phenomenon under study ( Yin, 2003 ), meaning the phenomenon has been previously inaccessible to scientiﬁc investi-gation. Action Appliance represents a global organization managingin an extended supply chain. While the parent corporation over-sees many operations and supply chain activities, each subsidiaryoperates autonomously within its own local environment. Returnsmanagement is a process that occurs primarily at local levels, ratherthan being managed at the global scale. To our knowledge, local-ized returns management is typical of global organizations. Thus,this single ﬁrm also presents representative evidence of the returns management process ( Yin, 2003 ).
Furthermore, the current research uses an embedded design
(Yin, 2003 ), in which there are multiple units of analysis employed within the single-case approach. We focus on two subsidiaries ofthe overall ﬁrm: an Italian subsidiary serving Western Europe andan American subsidiary serving the United States. The beneﬁt ofstudying one ﬁrm in this instance is that while single-ﬁrm casestudies are often downplayed as being unrepresentative and/oranecdotal war-stories ( McCutcheon and Meredith, 1993 ), in this sit- uation the one ﬁrm operating in a global supply chain is confrontedby multiple operating environments in its different markets.
Consistent with approaches advocated by Eisenhardt (1991) , our study of two subsidiaries enables an in-depth examinationof the returns management process in two different business set-tings, thus overcoming at least partially the limits of a single-caseapproach. At the same time, choosing two subsidiaries from thesame global organization provides for some level of control thatis not usually available in the naturalistic settings for which casestudies are valued ( Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007; Graebner and
Eisenhardt, 2004 ). The nature of the product and the overall ﬁrm strategy, structure and culture are consistent across both SBUs.However, the dramatic difference between them is evidenced in thebusiness environment each faces within its local market. Both SBUsmust contend with the global ﬁrm’s recent changes in supply chainstrategy and structure, but these changes manifest themselves dif-ferently in the way in which each SBU responds to the challengespresented within its own business environment.
Although the returns management process is an organizational and even a supply chain phenomenon, we chose to focus on individ-ual managers’ perceptions to better understand the social processof the business world ( Boyer and Swink, 2008 ). We utilized multiple sources of evidence for evaluation, including in-depth interviews,site visits to each subsidiary, printed materials provided by theﬁrm and obtained from secondary sources. This approach allowedus to trade-off a level of generalizability in exchange for the rich-ness obtained through interviews across levels and functional areaswithin the organization ( Adler and Clark, 1991; McGrath, 1981 ).
At Action Appliance, seven managers comprise the breadth of the organization’s marketing–operations management team acrossthe two SBUs. This includes one senior manager at the corpo-rate level whose responsibility spans the two SBUs in a supplychain role. The other six managers (three in each subsidiary) coverthe marketing, operations and spare-parts functions within theirrespective organization. Interviews were held individually witheach participating manager, and each interview lasted 60–180 min.The depth interviews were open ended and discovery oriented, fol-lowing an interview guide (see Fig. 2 ) that broadly identiﬁed topics of interest which were drawn from previous research in returns396 D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403
Fig. 2. Interview guide. management ( Carter and Ellram, 1998; Rogers et al., 2002 ). All interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. Allinterviews were conducted in English. Table 2 provides a proﬁle of the managers that were interviewed as part of this research.
To ensure rigor in the data collection and analysis, we employed two sets of trustworthiness criteria appropriate for qualitativemethodology (see Table 3 ). Tests of construct validity, internal validity, external validity, and reliability were used to assess thequality of the research design ( Flint et al., 2002; Yin, 2003 ). Addi- tionally, we applied criteria related to credibility, transferability,dependability, conﬁrmability and integrity ( Hirschman, 1986 ).
3.1. Research context
Action Appliance manufactures and distributes commercial and consumer appliances across a wide spectrum of product categories:heating; air conditioning and air treatment; food preparation andcooking; and cleaning and ironing products. Approximately threefourths of its worldwide revenue is derived from its consumerproducts division, and one fourth of worldwide revenue is gener-ated through the commercial division. Global competition is veryintense.Action Appliance has traditionally adopted local- ized/regionalized marketing strategies. Its decentralizedphilosophy has been challenged by a recent decision to movea signiﬁcant level of production to Asia to reduce labor and rawmaterial costs, which matches many competitors’ offshored pro-duction strategies. The decision to offshore created, at minimum,two signiﬁcant challenges. First, the delocalization to Asia requiredthe ﬁrm to deal with the complexity of a longer supply chain, i.e.,balancing the trade-off between reduced labor and productioncosts relative to higher transportation costs, longer transit timeand reduced service levels. Second, during the ﬁrm’s delocalizationto Asia, the level of returns suddenly began to rise in Europe andthe United States. Product and packaging quality were quicklyidentiﬁed as reasons for the unexpected increase of returns.
4. Results and discussion
The following discussion is thematically grouped by research proposition. We ﬁrst address the two propositions relating to func-tional integration and customer value, before moving on to theimpact of environmental factors.
Table 2
Proﬁle of management respondents.
Participant pseudonym Location Description
Antonio Italy (corporate) Global Supply Chain Director, male, age 45, 10 years with ﬁrm; responsible for global supply chainFabio Italy (European operation) Export Service Manager, male, age 37, 6 years with ﬁrm, previous experience as product manager; responsible for returns management, product liability
Giuseppe Italy (European operation) Regional Marketing Director Europe, male, age 40, 12 years with ﬁrm in two different periods; export sales manager prior to current position
Simone Italy (European operation) Operations Manager, male, age 35, 8 years with ﬁrm; directly involved in ﬁrm’s operations, production and logistics activities
Andrew U.S.A. Director of Operations in U.S., male, age 42, 8 months with ﬁrm; responsible for operations, inventory management, transportation, distribution and some aspects of ﬁnance
Robert (Bob) aU.S.A. Manager of Technical Services in U.S., male, age 37, 5 years with ﬁrm; responsible for returns management, product liability, customer service
CharlesaU.S.A. Managing Director in U.S., male, age 44, 8 years with ﬁrm, 7 months in U.S., responsible for marketing and sales in North America; now leading the U.S. ﬁrm aItalian nationals working in the U.S. subsidiary. Note that Andrew is the only native speaker of English. This makes some of the quotations employed so mewhat awkward.
The authors have attempted to preserve the intent of each speaker, while adjusting for clarity in the English language.D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 397
External validity Looks at whether the research results can be applied to the populations andthe settings of interest, establishes adomain in which the study’s ﬁndingscan be generalized•Use replication logic in multiple case studies•Not conducted in this research, since it is a single-ﬁrm case study
Reliability Demonstrates repeatability •Use case study protocol •Reﬁned and implemented case study protocol with each unit of analysis
•Develop case study data base •Created a case study database
Trustworthiness Extent to which the results appear to be acceptable representations of thedata•Key informants review draft of the case study reports•Sought feedback from participating managers across all levels and units of the ﬁrm
Credibility Extent to which the ﬁndings are unique to time and place, stability orconsistency of explanations•Concepts were represented by data from all participants•Evidence from multiple respondents used to support concepts
Dependability Interpretations are the result of the participation and are not biased bymisinformation or bias of theresearcher•Participants reﬂected on many experiences•Cross case analysis was used to record the responses for each participant at each organization
Conﬁrmability •Non-threatening and anonymous interviews•Open-ended questions allowed the respondents to reﬂect on experiences
Integrity •Participants responded and did not avoid the issues being discussed
4.1. Research proposition 1: functional integration and functional alignment
There is evidence across both subsidiaries that efforts to increase integration across the M-OI are creating functional alignmentwith respect to managing retailer-to-supplier returns. Participat-ing managers most often referred to functional alignment as effortsto improve cost and cost-avoidance decisions. There are, however,differences in how functional integration and alignment are beingdeveloped within the two subsidiaries.
In Europe, cross-functional integration has not been a major focus historically. However, as the company evolves, it is becomingan increasingly important aspect of how the company is managed,and is due in large part to the recent delocalization of production.Antonio is charged with making sure that all parts of the supplychain are better connected. He is working to make sure the market-ing and operations groups are more aligned, by focusing on mutualgoals for the two groups. For example, he says the ﬁrm must ... change the way people are thinking in terms of targets ....[We are linking] the targets of the different people closely together and linking them to the same topics.
One way that alignment is being developed is through better analysis of return codes. By classifying whether returns are dueto commercial returns, quality problems or operations problems,the marketing/sales teams and the operations teams can jointlydevelop resolution or return avoidance solutions. For example,commercial returns occur when retailers want to return slow-moving stock, or end-of-season stock. Giuseppe acknowledges thathis job is to work with the retailers to manage sales, but at the sametime to try to avoid a return that would incur operations costs andsubject the product to damage in transit. Instead, his group is work- ing to provide more promotional support to customers or to adjustmargins, which encourages retailers to keep the product. In thisway, he is helping the operations group avoid the costs of returningand processing the stock.
Additional case evidence of cross-functional alignment comes from Antonio when talking about better cost information sharedacross the marketing and operations groups:
[When marketing has] the ‘push politics’ to sell the products, then unfortunately the products end up back [in the warehouse].So I think the answer is to let ... sales people be aware of what the operations costs are related to, and try to understand whatis the real cost of their products, so maybe, I would guess theyare capable of managing in a different way their policies [with]the customers.
Sharing cost information across the marketing and operations groups does seem to be impacting how marketing manages theircustomers. Giuseppe provides evidence of improved functionalalignment because he recognizes the implications of pushing saleswithout regard to cost and proﬁtability implications. He says:
The other thing which we do, which is ridiculous on one side thinking about it ....is not to fulﬁll the orders 100%...we can try to supply 60% to start with and then wait until they [retailcustomer] start knocking on the door for more product.
By controlling the order fulﬁllment rate, marketing and oper- ations are working together to minimize the volume of potentialreturns. Such avoidance of unnecessary costs helps both functionalareas contribute jointly to the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability. However, theEuropean subsidiary is still in the early stages of developing internal398 D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 cross-functional integration related to returns management pro- cesses. Simone acknowledges that the operations group now has avery good ability to analyze returns at the customer and even theorder level. He states that the operations group uses this informa-tion to manage the return process, but that they could do a betterjob of sharing this information with the sales group. This could helpthem make better cost decisions regarding returns.
In the U.S. subsidiary, functional alignment is more pronounced than in Europe. The subsidiary has made a signiﬁcant effort tounderstand all costs related to actual returns, as well as cost-avoidance opportunities when restructuring sales terms withcustomers. The fact that a total cost analysis is now part of the deci-sion framework means that all functions (including marketing andoperations) are working towards the same goal of corporate prof-itability. Decisions regarding sales and returns are now based onnet margins because the sales team is much more knowledgeableabout the underlying cost implications of the various sale termsbeing negotiated with customers.
Charles explains that the company has completely revamped the way it operates with respect to marketing/sales and operations.Proﬁt margins were being eroded due to high return rates and amore proﬁtable approach was needed. Returns issues are a majorconcern in the U.S. subsidiary: ...I think the better we manage returns, the more effective we can be and it seems like just an accounting issue. But it’s reallya matter of competitiveness for us.
It is for this reason that he is making sure that both sales and operations people are involved in negotiations with customers.Negotiations include pricing and quantity terms, with delivery andreplenishment options tailored to different price points. The dif-ferent price points offered by sales personnel affect the cost andnetwork structure for the operations group, as well as order fulﬁll-ment costs and timing of deliveries to customers. Returns optionsare also tailored into the terms of sale. In this way, the companyis presenting a single, uniﬁed face to the customer, in a way thatminimizes returns to Action Appliance as well as increasing ﬁrmproﬁtability and ensuring value to customers.
The competitiveness issue is paramount when considering that the U.S. customer base is made up of a few very concentrated retail-ers across two very distinct channels: one for low-end commodityproducts and the other for high-end luxury goods. Especially in thecommodity channel, price points have eroded signiﬁcantly overthe years, squeezing margins for suppliers such as Action Appli-ance. The few powerful retailers mean that suppliers have verylittle leverage. Thus, the functionally aligned approach to workingwith these customers has become critically important to ensur-ing ongoing and proﬁtable relationships. Gatekeeping decisions(refusing to accept low-cost, low-margin products back from retail-ers) decreases margins at an early stage, but it is a policy that thesales force enforces to avoid more signiﬁcant costs that would beincurred if such product returns were allowed.
Evidence from the interviews suggests that the more market- ing and operations groups share information regarding customerorders, pricing, delivery options and the underlying operationalcosts of various sale terms, the better aligned the two groups willbe in terms of managing corporate resources. There is growingrecognition that avoiding and gatekeeping returns require cross-functional planning and decision-making that go far beyond thetraditional understanding of marketing as the authorizer of returnsand operations as the processor of returns.
Contextualizing the evidence relating to proposition 1, and recognizing that marketing–operations integration and functionalalignment is an internal ﬁrm issue related to a ﬁrm’s ability tocreate customer value, we attempt to link the case evidence tothe value drivers presented in Table 1 . Speciﬁcally, we see evi-dence of returns management policy in place in both subsidiaries, especially with respect to returns avoidance. The U.S. subsidiaryalso exhibits evidence of gatekeeping activity. Service supportin the form of information sharing and personal interaction inthe form of setting mutual goals is also exhibited in both sub-sidiaries. The European subsidiary also included problem-solvingactivity within the scope of personal interaction. The most visible,strongest driver concerned supplier know-how. Both subsidiariesdiscussed performance management, reporting and related appli-cations, particularly in the U.S. subsidiary. Both subsidiaries alsoutilized extensive knowledge of their customers’ business to assistin managing forward product movement (to minimize potentialreturns). A number of differences were also evident. The U.S. sub-sidiary was much more strategic in several respects. For example,its understanding and utilization of pricing program options as wellas the actual cost of a return allowed it to create very proactive pol-icy. Relatedly, the U.S. subsidiary’s operational returns processingincluded considerations of network design, routing and frequency.
4.2. Research proposition 2: functional alignment and customer value
Linking functional alignment to customer value is in its infancy in Europe. The organization is still addressing how to develop cross-functional integration for improved internal efﬁciency. However,there is some recognition that the beneﬁts of improved integrationand alignment will lead to increased customer value. Giuseppe, intalking about his retail customers, acknowledges that when retail-ers have no risk related to returns, they will order to their maximumpotential, in which case Action Appliance bears the risk of the highreturn rates. However, as a marketer, he understands that ActionAppliance often has better information about the inventory posi-tioning of the stock purchased by retailers, or sales trends acrossregions. He notes that they could be using their returns policiesand inventory information to help retailers make better decisionsabout how much stock is needed, or where inventory can be reposi-tioned within the retailer’s own network. To do this, the operationsgroup needs to be more involved with marketing in monitoringcosts and inventory ﬂows across countries and retailers so thatcustomers will beneﬁt more fully from the inherent knowledge ofAction Appliance.
Further evidence from the interviews suggests another aspect of customer value that the organization is beginning to recog-nize. Due to challenges in securing spare parts in a cost efﬁcientand timely manner now that the company has delocalized its pro-duction facilities, the spare parts group and the demand-planninggroup increasingly work together to ensure high levels of customerservice. For example, Simone says that not doing so ...means for Action Appliance, very bad service to our cus- tomers in terms of support, and my point of view it’s notpossible .... We need to have availability 99% of our [compo- nents] immediately and have the possibility to deliver in 24-48hours ...it’s for me the key of success to have a good service level to our customers, absolutely.
In the U.S., the cross-functional, aligned approach to managing retailer relationships and returns management issues has clearlyled the company to consider how to improve customer relation-ships through its value propositions. For example, the alignedapproach leads the organization towards the goal of returns avoid-ance. Not only does this avoid costs for Action Appliance, but it alsocan beneﬁt the retail customer. The U.S. approach to jointly manag-ing sales terms, return provisions and delivery support is designedto ensure good margins for the retailers and eliminate their need toorganize end-of-season returns. Its approach to provide a range ofdifferent terms of sale serves as an education tool for the ﬁrm thatD.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 399 also helps retailers choose the best terms and delivery options to meet their own needs. As Andrew explains:
Instead of giving them more, give them right. And by giving them right, take out the return provision and take out theallowance provision and basically give it to them at a lower cost.... Because the goal is you don’t want [returns] unless it’s truly damaged/defective. You don’t need to do the end of the seasonreturns if you’re really managing inventory together. You know,if I’m really selling you [customer] what you need.
For products that come back from the retailer after having been sold to a consumer, the U.S. subsidiary is also doing a bet-ter job of gatekeeping because they have a more complete costpicture for all products that can enter the returns channel. Thecompany is now better able to manage allowance terms and returnauthorizations for products that retailers have received back fromtheir consumers. In this way they are enabling retailers to managetheir margins by receiving credit for products received from con-sumers, but they don’t incur the costs of transporting or processingthose products that cannot be refurbished. Relationship value isenhanced, without compromising the cost structure for ActionAppliance.
Summarizing the value drivers ( Table 1 ) related to this propo- sition, both subsidiaries exhibit evidence of implementing returnsmanagement policies. The U.S. subsidiary’s policy (in the form ofreturns avoidance, gatekeeping, disposition and refurbishment) issomewhat broader than the European subsidiary’s policy (relatedto returns avoidance). Accounts receivable returns processing, inthe form of returns authorizations and related timely credit tocustomer accounts is also exhibited in the U.S. subsidiary. TheEuropean subsidiary realizes service support by considerable infor-mation sharing and problem solving; the U.S. subsidiary focused onachieving and conveying process clarity. Both subsidiaries exhibitevidence of personal interaction. We see broader evidence in theU.S. subsidiary (communication, problem solving, mutual goals andattitude) compared to the European subsidiary (communication).With respect to supplier know-how, the European subsidiary uti-lized its considerable knowledge of customer markets and business.In contrast, the U.S. subsidiary’s customer offering included prod-ucts, services and ideas — based on a foundation of understandingthe cost of a return.
4.3. Research proposition 3: environmental factors impact the cross-functional integration/functional alignment relationship
Three themes emerged with respect to the organization’s abil- ity to create alignment through cross-functional integration: theimpact of regulation, changes in the retail market, and the impactof offshored production. The regulatory impact was evident pri-marily in the European organization. Action Appliance is feelingthe effects of recently enforced EU restrictions on manufacturersand importers of electrical and electronic products. Directives suchas WEEE (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment) and RoHS(Restriction of Hazardous Substances) create additional strategicand operational compliance costs for the ﬁrm, thus increasing thechallenge of aligning functional activities related to returns. TheEuropean subsidiary is currently poorly organized for managingwaste, but the regulations bring increased awareness to the man-agers with respect to the beneﬁt of enhancing cross-functionalintegration to better achieve alignment within the organization.For example, Antonio says:
It’s very early days ...we start to understand the way to repro- cess our products and also to wasting out the products that arenot saleable anymore. For example, we understand now whatare the costs, what are the channels ...Many products have had to be redesigned in order to com- ply with the new mandates, providing opportunity for improvedcross-functional integration. Redesign can provide important com-petitive beneﬁts concerning quality, customer (and consumer)satisfaction, as well as innovative products to improve the ﬁrm’smarket positioning. Antonio says:
We [supply chain group] just started a project to reduce the number of sku’s, it’s mandatory. [The sales group] feels it’sthe right time to do that ...because they understand that it’s not possible to stay in the old fashioned way to manage theproducts. The product design group is also involved ... we’re changing the mentality in terms of new product developmentas well. We are re-writing everything.
Ultimately, new product designs and fewer sku’s will enable the organization to more effectively manage returns, and optimize theresources dedicated to doing so. For example, fewer sku’s reduceinventory commitment due to unreliable sales forecasts; this couldultimately reduce the volume of returns. Redesigned products incompliance with regulatory standards will be easier to process anddispose, with potential for reducing operating costs.
With regard to changes in the retail market, an interesting market factor related to cross-functional integration and the needfor alignment is the growth of cross-national retailers in Europe.When retailers operated within national boundaries there waslittle need for a corporate-wide return policy or processes formanaging returns. However, as several large European retailershave expanded across multiple countries, their returns behavior isspurring the need for a corporate-wide strategy to better addressthe return practices and behaviors of these retail giants. Thispower shift in the marketplace is awakening a need within ActionAppliance to become more functionally integrated and aligned tostrategically cope with the changing marketplace.
In the U.S., two market factors impact how the company oper- ates. As previously mentioned, the retailers in both of its marketchannels are very concentrated and powerful. Action Appliance hashistorically been a very small supplier to these retailers, with littlecontrol over the relationships or sales terms. The squeeze on mar-gins has made the company rethink its approach, and has driventhe need for the newer cross-functional approach, so as to moreeffectively control costs and achieve proﬁtability goals. The othermarket factor in the U.S. is the cultural propensity for consumersto return products. Unfettered returns can be disastrous for ActionAppliance from an operations cost perspective. While the companyrecognizes it must operate in this high-return market given the cul-tural business norms, this recognition is one of the drivers of theﬁrm’s adoption of the cross-functional, aligned approach. Lackingthe sales volume in the U.S. of its much larger competitors, ActionAppliance has recognized the importance of cost control and relatedmargin protection.
Finally, the recently offshored production facilities of the ﬁrm are impacting cross-functional integration and functional align-ment in both subsidiaries. The decision to offshore production wasan internal corporate decision, but the result is that productionnow occurs in a location far from the distribution and sales hubs.Product quality issues that are harder to monitor when produc-tion occurs at a distance have exacerbated the volume of returns.Increased volume can negatively affect the retailer’s perceptions ofthe supplier, and cause friction when negotiating sales terms andrelated return propositions. This is particularly relevant becausesales terms become very complicated due to offshore productionand the related pricing options being offered in the U.S. market. AsCharles explains:
The problem we face with returns is the agreements, the terms that we have with our customers on the direct import side400 D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 because when you sell something domestic it’s very easy to do the math of what you take back and what price you take it backat....[but] when you sell the product [priced from Asia] and then take the unit back in North Carolina, for example, there is thisbig issue of what’s the price you paid for it? That is not easy [towork out with the retailer].
Thus, the distance and quality of the Asian supply base is not only causing returns to increase, but also highlighting the need for morealigned policies and processes to avoid, and manage returns morecost effectively. The U.S. subsidiary has taken more steps to addressthe challenges presented by off-shore supply lines, which was oneof the major drivers to the development of the cross-functional,aligned model of sales and operations. Charles provides evidenceof this shift: ...what we call the Asian revolution ...was a big impact in mar- ket pricing in small appliances. So the average price of mostproducts went down dramatically and the proﬁtability of thecompany ... was reduced in a very signiﬁcant way ....S ow e had to ﬁnd new and more efﬁcient ways to do our business, andone of the big parts of this reorganization was on the operationsside ...and how we sold products.
In sum, M-OI and the ability to create functional alignment are both challenged and enhanced by external factors. Challenges ofoffshore production, the nature of the customer market, and regu-latory changes make it more difﬁcult for marketing and operationsto function in an integrated manner. Yet there is evidence from bothsubsidiaries that these external factors are also encouraging theﬁrm to more proactively seek solutions that foster cross-functionalintegration and functional alignment.
Linking the evidence to the customer value drivers ( Table 1 ) in regard to the third proposition, we see a number of differencesbetween subsidiaries. With regard to returns management policy,the European subsidiary is concerned with returns avoidance andwith disposition. The concern is strongly intertwined with prod-uct quality issues driven by EU compliance directives and relatedproduct redesign. To a lesser extent, supplier know-how drivers areevident, given the European subsidiary’s knowledge of customermarkets and their businesses.
Given the U.S. subsidiary’s previously described attention to policy, its drivers are heavily focused on returns processing, andspeciﬁcally with respect to all aspects of the operations component.Product quality concerns are related only to the offshore produc-tion issue, as EU-style compliance directives have not yet reachedthe U.S. Supplier know-how is broader than evidenced in the Euro-pean subsidiary, as knowledge and concern of customer marketsand their business is extended to include end-consumer behavior,given its powerful impact on returns management in the U.S.
4.4. Research proposition 4: environmental factors impact the functional alignment/customer value relationship
Several factors are shifting the playing ﬁeld in Europe. Regula- tory changes such as the consumer protection law and increasingretailer power have effectively changed retailers’ approach toreturns. European retailers, exercising their growing channelpower, are using returns policies to enhance their competitiveness(i.e., attractiveness with consumers). This accommodation to theconsumer puts increased pressure on Action Appliance as a sup-plier. Giuseppe provides evidence of the challenges the companyfaces: ...the guarantee has been translated from what was producer guarantee to a retailer guarantee .... And the retailer has to win the war against other retailers ...every retailer basically has theright written or unwritten ...they take the right [to return prod- uct], which is obviously an enormous problem and an enormousstrain on the company. And it’s one of the biggest problems forthe supply chain.
As discussed with proposition 2, the European subsidiary is still in the early stages of recognizing the link between improved func-tional alignment and customer value. Its current struggle is moreabout value balance between the ﬁrm and its retail customers.Many European retailers are using return privileges to create valuefor themselves. Some of the stronger retailers have recognized thecost of handling returns, and now make an invoice deduction forevery return they send back to Action Appliance. Action Appliancehas been able to work with these retailers to determine appropri-ate terms and levels for return deductions, thus preserving somemonetary value for the ﬁrm while ensuring value for the retailers.However, the European subsidiary’s organizational response hasbeen fairly reactionary in this situation.
In the U.S., the approach to strong retailer power is necessarily different. Action Appliance has always been the less powerful partyin its relationships with retailers, yet the new approach to doingbusiness is driving the ﬁrm to approach customers differently, witha variety of value propositions that help customers achieve thearrangements most appropriate for them. The new approach notonly includes sales terms, but also includes returns options. Forexample, Andrew explains how a salesperson might now approachthe customer when discussing different sales terms such as POE(Port of Entry) or DDP (Delivered Duty Paid).
One of the things that these guys [sales person] like to do at times is they’ll say ‘We’ll guarantee your sales and we’ll giveyou an end of season return.’ Because they’re paying more,because it’s prepaid, domestic prepaid. However, if they wereto look at the other version and say, ‘You’re going to actuallysave money because it’s a POE purchase, however you’ve got toeat the return. You’re going to own the inventory, customer. Andin the spirit of partnership, and I’m giving it to you at a lessercost because you’re buying it this way, therefore the expecta-tion for us, is there’s no surprises.’ Those options were never infront of them [before].
Thus, by restructuring the sales terms for customers, Action
Appliance enables each retail customer to determine its own bestvalue proposition. Sales terms not only include price, but also oper-ational elements such as order size, delivery timing, replenishmentoptions, as well as returns options. Andrew provides evidence thatthe more functionally aligned the U.S. subsidiary, the more it cantailor value propositions for customers.
Offshore production’s lengthy supply lines have negatively affected value creation for both the European and U.S. subsidiary.Speciﬁcally, long lead times for replacement parts not only makestimely retail customer service provision (i.e., repair) problematic,but also limits the ﬁrm’s ability to support a secondary market withrefurbished product to capture some percentage of value for ActionAppliance. The recognition of potential value recapture is limitedto high-margin sku’s. However, this determination requires thor-ough understanding of the cost of a return. As noted previously,the U.S. subsidiary’s awareness and understanding allows for suchpolicy and operational returns processing to occur; the Europeansubsidiary somewhat lags its U.S. partner in this regard.
Linking the evidence to the value drivers ( Table 1 ), both sub- sidiaries are driven by service support considerations, with respectto their problem-solving efforts concerned with offshore pro-duction supply issues. Both subsidiaries also similarly evidencesupplier know-how with respect to knowledge of the customermarket; customer business and their customers’ customer (i.e.,the end consumer) as they struggle to create and manage returnsD.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 401 management value propositions. The U.S. subsidiary also exhibits behavior incentivized by its creation of pricing program optionsand the related offers of products, services and ideas. Lastly, theU.S. subsidiary is driven by personal interaction evidenced by com-munications, mutual goals and a “can-do” attitude regarding salesterms and salesperson opportunities to create shared beneﬁt.
5. Key ﬁndings and implications, limitations and future research
In this section we overview several key ﬁndings and related implications based upon our preceding results. Then we note lim-itations to our research and conclude with several suggestions forfuture research.
5.1. Key ﬁndings
The in-depth analysis of Action Appliance sheds light on how managers perceive and address the management of returns withina single ﬁrm that operates in multiple geographic locations. Ourframework and propositions suggested that functional integrationat the M-OI would lead to better alignment of corporate resourcesand thus create higher levels of customer value (research proposi-tions 1 and 2). Additionally, the propositions suggested that theexternal business environment would impact the relationshipsbetween cross-functional integration, alignment and customervalue (research propositions 3 and 4).
We found evidence to support the ﬁrst two propositions across both organizations, but found that the U.S. subsidiary has beenmore proactive than its sister subsidiary in developing a cross-functional approach that ultimately enhances customer value. The“sell right, not more” approach, utilizing a more functionally inte-grated organizational approach, enables the ﬁrm to better meetcustomer orders and returns requirements. Internal alignment ofgoals and resources is in turn helping the company create morevalue for itself as well as for its customers. This is especially inter-esting in light of the fact that Action Appliance is a supplier tomultiple large, very powerful retailers in the U.S. Its approach toreturns management is one way the ﬁrm attempts to leverage veryimbalanced relationships.
The European subsidiary seems to be in an earlier stage of cross- functional integration, with only a nascent emphasis on customervalue. The variety and changing nature of retailer-initiated returnspolicies are hindering its ability to create customer value. Weakerlevels of functional integration could also be due to the fact thatthe organization is transitioning from a multi-market managementapproach to a more centrally organized European approach. Thishistorical differentiation of markets — each with its own businesstraditions, cultures, currencies and retailers — rendered functionalintegration across country markets nearly impossible.
We also found evidence to support propositions three and four, although the impacts of the external business environment seemto vary by location. This is not surprising, given the differencesbetween the two subsidiaries, and the very different operatingenvironments in which they compete. Interestingly, the externalfactors seem to have mixed impact on the relationship betweencross-functional integration and functional alignment (researchproposition 3). On the one hand, external factors such as regu-lations, changing market conditions and offshore production arecreating additional operating challenges for both subsidiaries. Onthe other hand, these changes in the external landscape seemto be spurring recognition and development of increased cross-functional initiatives to achieve greater levels of alignment. Thelonger-term effect, therefore, seems to be a positive moderatingeffect on the cross-functional integration/alignment relationship.By contrast, the external factors seem to have a more nega- tive impact on alignment/customer value (research proposition4). Although the European subsidiary’s customer value focus isnascent, evidence from both subsidiaries suggests that externalmarket changes, regulatory changes and offshore production aremaking it harder for ﬁrms to create customer value.
A number of managerial implications can be gleaned from this case. While the importance of managing the M-OI is widely recog-nized, the reality is that it is often difﬁcult to integrate these twofunctions, particularly in the area of returns. Yet, Action Applianceprovides evidence that it can be accomplished when returns arerecognized as a matter of competitive importance, and when costsare identiﬁed, communicated and shared across the functionalareas. The following suggestions of where managerial attentionshould be directed with respect to improved returns managementstem from our results and the drivers initially presented in Table 1 .
First, managers are encouraged to develop a better understand- ing of the total costs of returns. This could be done through aprocess-mapping exercise to understand the physical and ﬁnancialﬂows related to current return practices. Mapping and then costingreturns will provide a foundation for appropriate returns manage-ment policy development. Policies related to returns avoidance andgatekeeping in particular must be developed jointly across the M-OIto ensure corporate resources are aligned appropriately.
Second, cross-functional teams should be developed to interact with customers. This is not to say that operations personnel needto take over the sales function. Suppliers often create account man-agement teams that include marketing, operations, manufacturingand product design experts to more fully address the multipledimension of what customer organizations seek from their sup-pliers ( Flint and Mentzer, 2006 ). Thus, it is not uncommon for operations and marketing managers to collaborate on the cus-tomer front. Ultimately, operations must support the promisesthat marketers make to customers. Being part of the promise-making activity ensures that both marketing and operations arealigned to create product and service value for the customer. Indoing so, operations managers can learn more about how theiractions impact customers’ perception of value from the ﬁrm. Oper-ations managers also need to understand the customers’ businessand expectations so that they can appropriately allocate corporateresources to tailor fulﬁllment and delivery services to customersneeds. This is as important for forward fulﬁllment as it is for returnsprocessing. As we learned with Action Appliance, the operationsrole in helping the marketing team provide value propositions tocustomers in the form of sales terms and delivery options thatincluded provisions for returns, can help reduce operational costsin both forward and reverse supply chain situations, and mayactually help reduce the volume of returns a supplying ﬁrm willencounter.
Third, a focus on product quality has long been the domain of operations. The importance placed on product and service qualityis not just about value for consumers, but should also be con-sidered for managing relationships with intermediary customerssuch as retailers. Product and delivery quality can go a long waytowards preventing unnecessary returns. Return service quality canalso have an important impact on a customer’s perception of valuereceived from a supplying ﬁrm.
Fourth, managers are encouraged to measure performance in a cross-functional manner and develop feedback mechanisms forimprovement related to the value drivers within the ﬁrm. Sharingreturns performance with customers would also provide furtheropportunity to reduce future returns. For example, when retailersand their suppliers jointly review returns issues and performance,better understanding can be achieved regarding true quality issuesand/or gatekeeping challenges, in particular, leading to betterdecision-making to reduce the need or returns.402 D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403
A ﬁnal managerial implication is derived from the contrast between the two subsidiaries. The challenge for managers is to con-tinually adapt to the changing business environment in ways thatvalue can be offered, evaluated and captured for both a ﬁrm andits customers. The offerings in question may (or may not) be thesame across geographic business models within a global ﬁrm. Forexample, Action Appliance has always employed a market-speciﬁcapproach to doing business, and does not try to standardize thebusiness model across the many locations in which it operates.Indeed, the U.S. managers were quick to point out that the speciﬁcpolicies and actions taken in the U.S. could not translate directly tothe European subsidiary’s attempts to redress the returns prob-lem. While standardization of returns processes may indeed beimpossible to achieve across the operating environments due todifferent market constraints, organizational infrastructures and dif-fering legal frameworks, what can be standardized is the strategic,integrative cross-functional approach to returns management. Inother words, the details of the process may be less important thanthe underlying philosophy of the process.
There are also several theoretical implications that can be dis- cerned from this research. First, consistent with the work ofSawhney and Piper (2002) , we (re)verify a cross-functional con- ceptualization with customer value creation. Second, we extendtheir notion of customer value creation to include the reversesupply chain. This contribution is particularly important becausereturns are often thought of solely in cost terms (a cost of doingbusiness; a cost to be minimized), but rarely thought of as ameans to enhance customer value and/or as a means to increasethe supplying ﬁrm’s competitiveness. Third, we also extend thework of Sawhney and Piper (2002) by exploring the role of func- tional alignment as a bridge between cross-functional integrationand customer value. This is not to suggest that alignment is thesole mediator between cross-functional integration and customervalue, but rather to suggest, as a starting point, how ﬁrms mayemploy integration and alignment to enhance the value propo-sition offered to customers. Fourth, the focus on customer valuere-emphasizes the importance of operations and marketing play- ing a joint role in creating more satisﬁed customers over the longterm. Customer’s value perceptions will change over time ( Flint and
Mentzer, 2000; Flint et al., 2002 ), so suppliers need to understand how such changes necessitate appropriate responses. For example,as customers (and consumers) around the world become increas-ingly focused on environmental sustainability, the scope of whatthe returns management process involves may grow dramatically.This expected change in customer value suggests that researchregarding returns management and reverse supply chain ﬂows willbe increasingly relevant. A ﬁnal theoretical implication relates tothe alignment of value perceptions within a supply chain. Returnsavoidance strategies can be understood as a means to create valueby the manufacturer for the retailer, consumer and for the manufac-turer itself. Gatekeeping policies, on the other hand, are beneﬁcialto the manufacturer, but not necessarily to the retailer or con-sumer. Retailers prefer not to gatekeep — as a means of keepingtheir consumers satisﬁed they take back all kinds of product, andthen pass the returns to the manufacturer, whether they’re autho-rized returns (i.e., defective) or not (i.e., buyer’s remorse). Thus, itwould be beneﬁcial to address the drivers of value perception, andrelated value creation, across different channel members.
5.2. Limitations and future research
Several limitations to the research should be noted. An in-depth case study cannot claim to be representative of a broader popula-tion. Additionally, the role of functional alignment as a mediatingfactor between cross-functional integration and customer valueneeds to be further explored. Furthermore, the inclusion of align-ment as a mediating factor suggests that organizational-level and individual-level performance metrics and related reward systemsalso should be considered to more fully understand the role ofalignment in creating customer value. There may be other factorsthat mediate the proposed relationship; as well, the direct relation-ship between cross-functional integration and customer value alsoshould be explored. Quantitative research methods could betteraddress the nature and strength of mediating and direct effects nowthat our qualitative approach has provided preliminary evidence ofsuch relationships.
Our focus on customer value through returns management has been based on the conceptual value drivers identiﬁed from theliterature. These drivers represent a way of understanding and con-ceptualizing the importance of returns management as a ﬁrm-leveland supply chain process. Future research needs to substantiatethe role and impact of these drivers, which were given preliminarycredence in this research. The relationship of these drivers to eachother and their role in customer value creation need to be moreformally validated. As well, there may be additional drivers not yetelucidated by the current research.
Our focus has been on customer value, but future research also needs to more fully address value that accrues to the supplying ﬁrm.
Our purpose in this paper was to highlight one aspect of value —customer value — that can accrue from M-OI of the returns man-agement process. While we noted multiple instances where valueaccrued to the supplier (i.e., Action Appliance), we did so with-out comprehensively addressing such value creation. Relatedly, therole of “knowledge transfer” and/or organizational learning’s abilityto provide assistance in creating supplier ﬁrm value across sub-sidiaries went unexplored in this research. Future research needsto address a broader spectrum of value opportunities that accrueacross supply chain members.
In this research, the role of the external business environment was an important element in understanding how the two sub-sidiaries manage returns. Future research needs to extend thescope and nature of the external business environment to captureadditional permutations of how the local operating environmentimpacts managers’ decisions and strategy development. Futureresearch needs to extend beyond a single ﬁrm, and also to additionalgeographic locations to gain a broader understanding of returnsmanagement processes and how they are inﬂuenced by other exter-nal factors.
Finally, the intent of this research was to develop a deep and rich understanding of how managers manage the process of deal-ing with return goods, particularly as they must interact with eachother across functional boundaries to manage returns effectively.These results serve to frame future research on this topic, whichmay also build on the strength of other methodologies to developadditional insights and generalizable corroboration of the initialresults discussed in this paper.
References
Abernathy, W.J., 1976. Production process structure and technological change. Deci- sion Science 7, 607–619.
Adler, P.S., Clark, K.B., 1991. Behind the learning curve: a sketch of the learning process. Management Science 37 (3), 267–281.
Berry, W., Hill, T., Klompmaker, J.E., 1999. Aligning marketing and manufacturing strategies with the market. International Journal of Production Research 37 (16),3599–3618.
Berry, W., Hill, T., McLaughlin, C., 1991. Linking strategy formulation in marketing and operations: empirical research. Journal of Operations Management 10 (3),294–302.
Bharadwaj, S., Bharadwaj, A., Bendoly, E., 2007. The performance effects of com- plementarities between information systems, marketing, manufacturing, andsupply chain processes. Information Systems Research 18 (4), 437–453.
Blackburn, J.D., Guide Jr., V.D.R., Souza, G.C., van Wassenhove, L.N., 2004. Reverse supply chains for commercial returns. California Management Review 46 (2),6–22.D.A. Mollenkopf et al. / Journal of Operations Management 29 (2011) 391–403 403
Bowman, C., Ambrosini, V., 2000. Value creation versus value capture: towards a coherent deﬁnition of value in strategy. British Journal of Management 11, 1–15.
Boyer, K.K., Swink, M.L., 2008. Empirical elephants—why multiple methods are essential to quality research in operations and supply chain management. Jour-nal of Operations Management 26, 337–348.
Browning, T.R., Heath, R.D., 2009. Reconceputalizing the effects of lean on production costs with evidence from the f-22 program. Journal of Operations Management27, 23–44.
Calantone, R., Droge, C., Vickery, S., 2002. Investigating the manufacturing– marketing interface in new product development: does context affect thestrength of relationships? Journal of Operations Management 20, 273–287.
Carter, C.R., Ellram, L.M., 1998. Reverse logistics: a review of the literature and framework for future investigation. Journal of Business Logistics 19 (1),85–102.
Closs, D.J., Jacobs, M.A., Swink, M.L., Webb, G.S., 2008. Toward a theory of compe- tencies for the management of product complexity: six case studies. Journal ofOperations Management 26, 590–610.
Day, G.S., Wensley, R., 1983. Marketing theory with a strategic orientation. Journal of Marketing 47 (3), 79–89.
Drucker, P., 1973. Management. Harper & Row, New York.Eisenhardt, K.M., 1991. Better stories and better constructs: the case for rigor and comparative logic. Academy of Management Review 16 (3), 620–627.
Eisenhardt, K.M., Graebner, M.E., 2007. Theory building from cases: opportunities and challenges. Academy of Management Journal 50 (1), 25–32.
Ellram, L.M., Tate, W.L., Billington, C., 2008. Offshore outsourcing of professional services: a transaction cost economics perspective. Journal of Operations Man-agement 26, 148–163.
Esper, T., Ellinger, A., Stank, T., Flint, D., Moon, M., 2010. Demand and supply integration: a conceptual framework of value creation through knowledge man-agement. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 38, 5–18.
Flint, D.J., Mentzer, J.T., 2000. Logisticians as marketers: their role when customers’ desired value changes. Journal of Business Logistics 21 (2), 19–45.
Flint, D.J., Mentzer, J.T., 2006. Striving for integrated value chain management given a service-dominant logic for marketing. In: Vargo, S.L., Lusch, R.F. (Eds.), Theservice-dominant logic of marketing: dialogue, debate, and directions. M.E.Sharpe, Inc., New York.
Flint, D.J., Woodruff, R.B., Gardial, S.F., 2002. Exploring the phenomenon of cus- tomers’ desired value change in a business-to-business context. Journal ofMarketing 66 (4), 102–117.
Graebner, M.E., Eisenhardt, K.M., 2004. The seller’s side of the story: acquisition as courtship and governance as syndicate in entrepreneurial ﬁrms. AdministrativeScience Quarterly 49, 366–403.
Gronroos, C., 2008. Service logic revisited: who creates value and who co-creates?
European Business Review 20 (4), 298–314.
Guide Jr., V.D.R., van Wassenhove, L.N., 2001. Managing product returns for reman- ufacturing. Production and Operations Management 10 (2), 142–155.
Guide Jr., V.D.R., van Wassenhove, L.N., 2006. Closed loop supply chains: an intro- duction to the feature issue (part 1). Production and Operations Management15 (3), 345–350.
Hausman, W.H., Montgomery, D.B., Roth, A.V., 2002. Why should marketing and manufacturing work together? Sompe exploratory empirical results. Journal ofOperations Management 20, 241–257.
Hirschman, E.C., 1986. Humanistic inquiry in marketing research: philosphy, method, and criteria. Journal of Marketing Research 23 (3), 237–249.
Hunt, S.D., Morgan, R.M., 1995. The comparative advantage theory of competition.
Journal of Marketing 59 (April), 1–15.
Jüttner, U., Christopher, M., Baker, S., 2007. Demand chain management—integrating marketing and supply chain management. Industrial Marketing Management 36(3), 377–392.
Kocabasoglu, C., Prahinski, C., Klassen, R.D., 2007. Linking forward and reverse sup- ply chain investments: the role of business uncertainty. Journal of OperationsManagement 25, 1141–1160.
Malhotra, M.K., Sharma, S., 2002. Spanning the continuum between marketing and operations. Journal of Operations Management 20, 209–219.McCutcheon, D.M., Meredith, J., 1993. Conducting case study research in operations management. Journal of Operations Management 11, 239–256.
McDaniel, S.W., Kolari, J.W., 1987. Marketing strategy implications of the miles and snow strategic typology. Journal of Marketing 51 (4), 19–30.
McGrath, J.E., 1981. Dilemmatics—the study of research choices and dilemmas.
American Behavioral Scientist 25 (2), 179–210.
Meredith, J., 1998. Building operations management theory through case and ﬁeld research. Journal of Operations Management 16, 441–454.
Miles, R.E., Snow, C.C., 1978. Organizationl Strategy, Structure and Process. McGraw-
Hill, New York, NY.
Mollenkopf, D., Closs, D.J., 2005. The hidden value in reverse logistics. Supply Chain
Management Review (July/August), 34–43.
Mollenkopf, D.A., Rabinovich, E., Laseter, T.M., Boyer, K.K., 2007a. Managing internet product returns: a focus on effective service operations. Decision Sciences 38(2), 215–250.
Mollenkopf, D.A., Russo, I., Frankel, R., 2007b. The returns management process in supply chain strategy. International Journal of Physical Distribution & LogisticsManagement 37 (7), 568–592.
Moller, K.E.K., Torronen, P., 2003. Business suppliers’ value creation potential: a capability-based analysis. Industrial Marketing Management 32, 109–118.
O’Leary-Kelly, S.W., Flores, B.E., 2002. The integration of manufacturing and marketing/sales decisions: impact on organizational performance. Journal ofOperations Management 20, 221–240.
Rogers, D.S., Lambert, D.M., Croxton, K.L., Garcia-Dastugue, S.J., 2002. The returns management process. International Journal of Logistics Management 13 (2),1–18.
Roth, A.V., van der Velde, M., 1991. Operations as marketing: a competitive service strategy. Journal of Operations Management 10 (3), 303–328.
Rubio, S., Chamorro, A., Miranda, F.J., 2008. Characteristics of the research on reverse logistics (1995–2005). International Journal of Production Research 46 (4),1099–1120.
Sawhney, R., Piper, C., 2002. Value creation through enriched marketing–operations interfaces: an empirical study in the printed circuit board industry. Journal ofOperations Management 20, 259–272.
Shapiro, B., 1977. Can marketing and manufacturing co-exist? Harvard Business
Review 55 (5), 104–114.
Sharman, G., 1984. The rediscovery of logistics. Harvard Business Review 62 (5),
71–79.
Slater, S.F., 1997. Developing a customer value-based theory of the ﬁrm. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 25 (2), 162–167.
Stock, J.R., Mulki, J.P., 2009. Product returns processing: an examination of practices of manufacturers, wholesalers/distributors, and retailers. Journal of BusinessLogistics 30 (1), 33–62.
Stuart, I., McCutcheon, D.M., Handﬁeld, R., McLachlin, R., Samson, D., 2002. Effec- tive case research in operations management: a process perspective. Journal ofOperations Management 20, 419–433.
Swink, M.L., Song, M., 2007. Effects of marketing–manufacturing integration on new product development time and competitive advantage. Journal of OperationsManagement 25, 203–217.
Tibben-Lembke, R.S., 1998. The impact of reverse logistics on the total cost of own- ership. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice 6 (4), 51–60.
Ulaga, W., 2003. Capturing value creation in business relationships: a customer perspective. Industrial Marketing Management 32, 677–693.
Venkatraman, N., Camillus, J.C., 1984. Exploring the concept of ‘ﬁt’ in strategic man- agement. Academy of Management Review 9 (3), 513–525.
Wagner, S.M., Bode, C., 2008. An empirical examination of supply chain performance along several dimensions of risk. Journal of Business Logistics 29 (1), 307–325.
Woodruff, R.B., 1997. Customer value: the next source for competitive advantage.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 25 (2), 139–153.
Wu, Z., Choi, T.Y., 2005. Supplier–supplier relationships in the buyer–supplier triad: building theories from eight case studies. Journal of Operations Management24, 27–52.
Yin, R.K., 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd ed. Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks, CA.