ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect  
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017) 000–000  
 www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 
* Paulo Afonso. Tel.: +351 253 510 761; fax: +351 253 604 741  
E-mail address:  psafonso@dps.uminho.pt 
2351-9789 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scie ntific committee of the Manufacturing Engi neering Society Inte rnational Conference 2017.  
Manufacturing Engineering Society Intern ational Conference 2017, MESIC 2017, 28-30 June 
2017, Vigo (Pontevedra), Spain 
Costing models for capacity optimiza tion in Industry 4.0: Trade-off 
between used capacity an d operational efficiency 
A. Santanaa, P. Afonsoa,*, A. Zaninb, R. Wernkeb 
a University of Minho, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal 
bUnochapecó, 89809-000 Chapecó, SC, Brazil  
Abstract 
Under the concept of "Industry 4.0", production proce sses will be pushed to be increasingly interconnected, 
information based on a real time basis an d, necessarily, much more efficient. In  this context, capacity optimization 
goes beyond the traditional aim of capacity maximization, contributing also for organization’s profitability and value. 
Indeed, lean management and continuous improvement approaches suggest capacity optimization instead of 
maximization. The study of capacity optimization and costing models is an important research topic that deserves contributions from both the practical and theoretical perspectives. This paper presents and discusses a mathematical model for capacity management based on different cos ting models (ABC and TDABC). A generic model has been 
developed and it was used to analyze idle capacity and to design strategies towards the maximization of organization’s 
value. The trade-off capacity maximiza tion vs operational efficiency is highlighted and it is shown that capacity 
optimization might hide operational inefficiency.  
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scie ntific committee of the Manufacturing Engi neering Society International Conference 
2017. 
Keywords:  Cost Models; ABC; TDABC; Capacity Manage ment; Idle Capacity; Operational Efficiency 
1.Introduction 
The cost of idle capacity is a fundamental information for companies and their management of extreme importance 
in modern production systems. In general, it is defined as unused capacity or production potential and can be measured 
in several ways: tons of production, available hours of manufacturing, etc. The mana gement of the idle capacity Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018)  2–9
2351-9789 © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services.
10.1016/j.promfg.2018.01.002
10.1016/j.promfg.2018.01.002 2351-9789© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V . 
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Through-life Engineering Services. Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (201 7) 000– 000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
2351-9789 © 201 7The Authors. Pu blished by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Through-life Engineering 
Services .6th International Conference on Through- life Engineering Services, TESConf 2017, 7- 8 November 
2017, Bremen, Germany
Socio -economic and demographic factors that contribute to the 
growth of the civil a viation industry
Sri Addepalli*a, Gerardo Pagaldayb, Konstantinos Salonitisa, Rajkumar Roya
aManufacturing, SATM, Cranfield University, Cranfield MK43 0AL, UK
bIKERLAN, Pº J. M. Arizmendiarrieta, 2, Arrasate -Mondragón (Gipuzkoa) 20500, Spain
Abstract
The civil aviation industry has captured the world’s share both in ter ms of operations and markets. The International 
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) reported an increase of 6.3 percent in passenger traffic to 3.7billion in 2016 
based on recorded departures globally. This paper is an effort to understand the driving force for the civil aviation 
sector based on demand. As per published report s, the trends show the continued growth in the sector even with the 
inclusion of production challenges in order to meet global market demand. Though the sector is heavily reliant on a 
variety of challenges and factors, the industry has established itself as the most advanced and lucrative industry that 
continues to ‘PULL’ the associated industries . This paper identifies and establishes the ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors under 
social, demographic and economic factors and how they exercise significant control making the ever -growing 
industry RESILIENT to changing geo -economic and political landscapes. 
©2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of t he scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Through-life Engineering 
Services .
Keywords: Manufacturing network ,Economics ,Logistics
*Corresponding author. Tel.: + 441234 758346
E-mail address: p.n.addepalli@cranfield.ac.ukAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Procedia Manufacturing 00 (201 7) 000– 000
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
2351-9789 © 201 7The Authors. Pu blished by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Through-life Engineering 
Services .6th International Conference on Through- life Engineering Services, TESConf 2017, 7- 8 November 
2017, Bremen, Germany
Socio -economic and demographic factors that contribute to the 
growth of the civil a viation industry
Sri Addepalli*a, Gerardo Pagaldayb, Konstantinos Salonitisa, Rajkumar Roya
aManufacturing, SATM, Cranfield University, Cranfield MK43 0AL, UK
bIKERLAN, Pº J. M. Arizmendiarrieta, 2, Arrasate -Mondragón (Gipuzkoa) 20500, Spain
Abstract
The civil aviation industry has captured the world’s share both in ter ms of operations and markets. The International 
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) reported an increase of 6.3 percent in passenger traffic to 3.7billion in 2016 
based on recorded departures globally. This paper is an effort to understand the driving force for the civil aviation 
sector based on demand. As per published report s, the trends show the continued growth in the sector even with the 
inclusion of production challenges in order to meet global market demand. Though the sector is heavily reliant on a 
variety of challenges and factors, the industry has established itself as the most advanced and lucrative industry that 
continues to ‘PULL’ the associated industries . This paper identifies and establishes the ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors under 
social, demographic and economic factors and how they exercise significant control making the ever -growing 
industry RESILIENT to changing geo -economic and political landscapes. 
©2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of t he scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Through-life Engineering 
Services .
Keywords: Manufacturing network ,Economics ,Logistics
*Corresponding author. Tel.: + 441234 758346
E-mail address: p.n.addepalli@cranfield.ac.uk Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9 32 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017 ) 000– 000
1.Introduction
Over the last few decades, civil aviation sector demand has continued to grow. A recent ICA O release in January 
2017 reported that there were 35 million departures globally in 2016 with global traffic expressed as revenue 
passenger -kilometres or RPKs accounting to 7,015 billion [1]. The Air Transport Bureau reported +7.6 percent year-
on-year growth between 2015 –16(Fig. 1) confirming the continued growth and impressive expansion of the sector in 
terms of RPK [2].
Further, the 2016 forecast of the global gross domestic product (GDP) growth has been reported to be around 2.4 
percent. It is worth mentioning that more than half of the global tourist traffic and a bout 35 percent of the world trade 
by value is covered by air travel. On the contrary, the global cargo traffic market follows an alternate profile and is characterised by the industry’s strong dependence on current production and handling capacities. Despite the cargo traffic being less prominent than the passenger traffic, it continues to show a growth of 3.8 percent in terms of freight tonne kilometres (FTKs) towards to end of 2016 [3].Though the cargo sector showed a good year -end performance, 
there were significant challenges accounted due to stagnation of world trade.
With the ever increasing demand of aircrafts and freight liners especially in the civil market, the manufacturing sector 
is pursuing the development of innovative next generation platforms to achieve cost effectiveness, travel comfort and 
delivery targets. The Airbus’s Global Market Forecast for 2016- 2035 reports that the growth in air traffic would 
account to a rise of 4.5 percent annually with a demand of 33,000 new aircrafts approaching the value of US$5.2 trillion over the next 20 years [4]. Further the AGP reports that, in the UK alone, there is a backlog of over 13,000 aircrafts w ith an equivalent value of GBP£200 billion suggesting a large scope for growth in the civil aviation sector 
[5]. The current landscape clearly indicates that the airlines continue to achieve profits not only due to good traffic 
behavio ur but also due to an increase in efficiency in aspects such as airplane load, accurate business models and 
other internal activities. This economic bonanza leads airlines to renovate their fleets, which has repercussions on the 
backlog for aircraft OEMs. The aim of this paper is to understand various factors that govern the growth of the sector 
through the identification of major ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors that cont rol the manufacturing demand.
2.‘Push’ and ‘Pull’ –an introduction
In order to understand and establish various factors that contribute to the growth of the sector, it is essential to 
define them as ‘Push’ and ‘Pull’ factors. Push factors may be referred t o those internal factors that push the industry 
to adapt and consume products. These factors are intrinsic and are dependent on intangible socio- economic, 
demographic and market knowledge. ‘Pull’ factors on the other hand are external forces that attract t he industry to 
influence the consumption of the same product [6].  These ‘pull’ factors are heavily reliant on consumer’s needs and 
behaviours’ including attractiveness, convenience and accessibility through innovative technological features, price, 
quality and a range of depen dent metrics. For this research, the foll owing fundamental key performance indicators or 
KPIs are used;
•Social
•Economic
•Demographic
Most of the factors have both a ‘pushing’ and a ‘pulling’ attitude and some which constitute as basic influencing 
factors. For the purpose of the paper, only socio- economic and demographic factors are considered. They are 
classified mostly based on how much they sway on the push and pull attribute.
Fig. 2Forecast business models as per Boeing [15]
Fig. 1Passenger traffic in RPK (2015 -2016) [2]4 Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9
Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017) 000– 000 3
3.Key factors influencing demand
Persistence and resilience are two themes that best describe air transport demand over the last few years. The large 
increase in passenger traffic of 6.4% (2015) represents the strongest growth rate since 2010 (6.6%), the year in which 
it rebounded from the Great Recession. In fact, despite a slight weakening of economic growth at 3.1% in 2015,growth in passenger traffic approached the pre -recessionary growth levels that were seen in 2004 to 2007 [7][8]. 
International tourism in particular was irrepressible in 2015, even considering the geopolitical risks that persisted in certain parts of the world, such as Eastern Europe and the Middle East. By and large, the international traveller 
appears to have discounted these risks. Thus in order to assess the various factors, three KPIs have been used, the 
details of which are addressed in the sub- sections below.
3.1.Social factors
The social dimension points into the direction that, demand patterns for aircrafts are different between the world 
regions. But, in fact, the demand patterns are strongly affected by economic and demographic factors and it is difficult to identify social factors that play a relevant role. Considering Boeing [7]and Airbus market analysis [4][9]
and the factors that those companies take into account for making their future demand scenarios, social factors do not appear between the drivers that th ey consider. A number of economic, performance and productivity related variables 
are considered in their methodology and only “Propensity to travel” (Pull) and “Environmental awareness” (Push) could be considered in the social field. Moreover, both are not independent from economic trends and they would not be considered as first class factors. Where social dimensions traditionally included economic awareness, 
technological affinity, cultural particularities, traditions, conventions, habits, behavio ur (e.g . saving behavio ur), 
values and needs of a country’s population , none of these aforesaid dimensions appear in the market analysis by 
major corporations and only “second class” factors have been considered.
3.1.1. Propensity to travel
The passion to travel dominat es the industry with a strong relationship between the GDP and willingness of 
passengers. As per Airbus GMF, European and American nationals are the most willing passengers, and it is 
estimated that the current level is at 25 percent as of 2015. Further the report forecasts that in 2035 the total population who will travel by air will increase to 75 percent of the population of emerging countries [4]. This is 
clearly evidenced by the world airport traffic rankings issued by Airports Council International (ACI), where Atlanta, 
Beijing and Dubai took the top 3 places (Table 1) . ACI reported that of the 1,179 airports across the world, the 
passenger’s hub grew 4.7 percent with approximately 1.4billion people passing through the top 20 airports 
representing 18 percent of the global passenger traffic [10]. These confirm the behavioural attributes of the passengers 
and establish that there are a variety of factors that will support the growth of the sector establishing this social factor as a ‘pull’ influence to the industry.
3.1.2. Environmental awareness
Reduction of noise and fuel consumption in terms of reduction in CO
2emissions will continue to be the primary 
target and will be achieved through the development of commercial aviation technologies. Development of engine technologies will be advanced through the use of innovative materials, cutting -edge aerodynamic designs and smart 
manufacturing techniques, which will be driven through heavy investments in research and innovation amongst other scientific groups. Specific technologies such as advanced wing designs that contribute to better fuel efficiency (e.g. using composites) form typical examples where weight reduction would significantly reduce fuel consumption thereby contributing to further reduction in emis sions [7].
Much of this progress impr oves airplane operation economics, which directly affect the airline profitability. This 
further enables the industry’s move to a more sustainable scenario, where environmental impacts suffer an important 
improvement. Boeing reported that there has been si gnificant reduction of both noise footprint by 90 percent and 
emissions by 70 percent from the jet engines produced in the late 2000s when compared with those from the 1960s 
[4][7]. Thus, through global regulations established to control reduction of emission and noise footprints have 
‘pushed’ the industry to continuously monitor and improve the technology and provide fuel efficient and 
environmental friendly jet engines. Further roadmaps such as Flightpath 2050 envisage the need to cut down the noise 
and emiss ion levels by 65 and 70 percent respectively [11]. Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9 5 4 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017 ) 000– 000
3.1.3. Summary
Published reports and literature suggest that the propensity to travel will continue to grow over the next 20 yea rs 
establishing it as a major ‘pull’ factor. However, environmental awareness will heavy control the manufacturing 
practices with pressure on the industry to achieve targets ‘pushing’ the sector away.
3.2.Economic factors
In any industry, economy plays a pivot al role that encompasses the overall growth of the sector, and civil aviation, 
with the ever -growing demand is no exception. To give a big picture, Airbus GMF 2016 estimates the 20 year 
demand for new passenger and freight aircrafts to be just over 33,000 aircrafts constituting a market value of over 
USD$5.2trillion emphasising and establishing the impact of market growth [4]. The report suggested that the yearly RPK growth from emerging and developing markets accounted to + 5.6 percent and that from the developed markets 
at a +3.7 percent as of 2015. This situation is mainly influenced by economic factors, which vary significantly between regions. Some of the factors have an unpredictable future, depending on regional and local behaviours and decisions. Others will vary depending on the strategic decision adopted by the companies. In order to fully assess the economic factors, they are grouped under four categories as explained in the sub -sections below.
3.2.1. Key economic indicator s
In aviation, economic development is a strong indication for market demand. The evolution of Emerging and 
Developing regions establishes a growing scenario that existing manufacturers are trying to address. Being GDP a common indicator, others are arising as crucial for understanding the actual market demand. Whilst GDP remains as an important driver for air transport, its relationship to aviation’s growth has evolved over time. This is apparent at a global level, but is driven by activity at a regional o r country level. Airbus reported that wherein the world GDP was 
under 2.6 percent during the second quarter of 2016, the passenger traffic showed an overall growth of +6.2 percent with a spilt of 4.2 to 2 percent between 54 emerging markets and 32 advanced markets [4]. It is clear that GDP is not 
the only factor that drives air traffic growth. Components such as private consumption, international trade, tourism, crude oil prices, airline profits and increase in productivity all contribute to the economic factors [12] .
3.2.2. Liberalisation
International air transport is governed by a 60 year -old set of rules, the bilateral system. It was designed for 
another age to enhance free peaceful movement of p assengers and freight. Bilateral Air Service Agreements contain 
restrictions on the number of airlines and frequency of services on many international routes, where many countries have limits on airline ownership and control by foreign nationals. Airlines have built an industry that is safer, more 
accessible and more efficient than ever before. Now we need governments to bring policies in line with the changes 6 Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9
Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017) 000– 000 5
airlines have achieved. The future success of the industry rests on greater commercial freedom to serve markets where 
they exist and to merge and consolidate where it makes business sense [13].
This liberalization can be reached using different ways: either through bilateral agreements and or agreements 
across trading blocks e.g. ASEAN. Liberalisation of international air transport is essential. The liberalisation of 
operational and ownership restrictions is not an easy process, but it can be a very beneficial one. Experience from 
other industries demonstrates the positive impact it can have for both consumers and producers. A modern, 
commercial and global airline industry requires modern, commercial and global rules.
3.2.3. Airline business model
Low-cost carriers (LCCs) have revolutionised the short -haul market, expanding the choice of air transport to 
consumers at the lowest cost. And they have done so by leveraging their cost efficiency and innovation to remain in a 
leading position, even in a disconcerting market. However, as the industry dynamics have changed, so have the 
business strategies of LCCs.
To compete for cost- conscious, short- haul passengers, many traditional full -service carriers created new products, 
restructured and streamlined their processes, slashed costs and aggressively priced many routes. As a result, LCCs were forced to change or enhance their business models [14].
Airline business models continue to evolve. What was once a clear division between network, low -cost and charter 
models is now less clear, with network carriers operating low -cost, short -haul subsidiaries lost -cost carriers providing 
frequencies and services that attract business passengers; and charter carriers venturing into single -seat sales. Low -
cost carriers are even starting long- haul service, competing with network carriers on point -to-point routes. Boeing 
reported that the LCC models estimated at 26 percent of the global share will continue to increase to about 30 and 32 percent in 2025 and 2035 respectively. This will reduce the overall broader network share of 44 percent in 2015 to 
just over 42% in 2035 [15]. 
3.2.4. Externals shocks
Although the air -transport industry is subject to occasional market shocks, the industry’s demand is resilient and 
services are often seen as essential, and spending on discretionary trips for vacations or family events is frequently 
high priority. Over the last 30 years, the aviation industry has experienced recessions, oil -price shocks, near 
pandemics, wars, and security threats, yet traffic has continued to grow on average at 5 percent annually. Changes in 
the structure of an economy can also result in short -term effects. For example, although the slow- down in China’s 
GDP growth attracted much notice in the media, air travel continued to perform well. The reason: Chinese consumer sectors, which drive travel behaviour, remained strong, while heavy industrial production and fixed investments weighed on top -line growth, feeding the headlines [4]. 
3.2.5. Summary
In summary, the analysis has shown that characterising economic factors is a challenge in itself. Though key 
economic indicators contribute to the ‘pull’ factor, bot liberalisation and the airline business model a ct as those 
internal ‘push’ factors forcing the industry to adapt to the ever -changing geo- economic variations. Over the years, 
there have been significant changes, in terms of technological and business models with significant push from factors such as ex ternal shocks due to multiple events which have served as both ‘push’ and ‘pull’ factors.
3.3.Demographic factors
Demography is an important factor dependent on the growing population and their behavioural attitude to travel by 
air. Emerging and developing cou ntries continue to not just suffer important chang es but also make a huge impact on 
this factor. This will influence the need for aircrafts, with very different positions for the regions. Both, quantity and “quality” of this population must be taken into a ccount for analysing the aircraft future demand. The major focus 
areas that affect the demand may be put into three categories as seen below.
3.3.1. Urbanisation
Long- haul traffic will increasingly be to, from or between aviation mega -cities, (defined as cities w ith more than 
10,000 daily international long -haul passengers) rising from 90 percent (1 million pas sengers a day) today to 95 
percent (2.5 million passengers a day) by 203 5. Aviation mega -cities are centres of urbanisation and wealth creation  Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9 76 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017 ) 000– 000
Fig. 4 World populations estimates (1950- 2015) and projections (2015-
2100). Source: United Nations World Population Prospects (2017) [16]
and will inc rease from 55 to 93cities by 203 5with 35 percent of World GDP centred there. These mega cities are 
already served well by air transportation and the existing route network will accommodate 70 percent of all traffic 
growth between now and 2035 .Having a m ajority of the premium passengers along the megacity routes, reports 
indicate that the traffic due to premium passengers in 2016 accounted to 11 percent which can be directly related to 
the growth in direct trade relations between international markets [4].
3.3.2. Working age population
The working age population varies between established and emerging markets which also affects the projected 
evolution. If the working age population increases, it will imply that the number of pas sengers who travel will also 
increase, suggesting the need for additional aircrafts. It should also be noted that over the next 15 years, aircrafts under operation now will also be aged and retire indicating the need for replacing air crafts indicating a l arge growth 
over the next few decades. Earlier this year, the United Nation’s Department of Economic Affairs reported that the 
world population continues to grow with the working age population (between 15 -59 years) constitute to just over 61 
percent of the world population which currently stands at 7.6 billion (mid -2017) [16].
Fig. 4 presents the regional population estimates and suggests that th e largest contributors will be Africa and Asia. 
This clearly indicates that the world population is set to grow due to improved fertility rates and significant life expectancy rates, suggesting that there will be boost in the survival rates with the life e xpectancy project to 77 years 
as of 2045- 2050 a significant rise from the current rate of 71 years (2010 -2015) [16].  With this growth comes the 
challenge of coping with the demand the industry is set to face. With a record high number of backlogs in the current scenario, the industry will need to push harder to make ends meet.
3.3.3. Growing middle classes
The previous sub -section though described the rise in working age population as a factor; economy does play a 
significant role in estimating the demand for aircrafts. Logically speaking, the larger the growth in economy, the 
larger the share of working age population strongly establishing that the passenger traffic will increase [17] . It has 
been reported that the middle classes currently estimated at 38 percent of world population, is set to rise to 55 percent of an estimated 8.8 billion people as of 2035. The bulk of this growth comes directly from new and emerging 
markets, suggesting a two- fold increase over the next 20 years [4].
3.3.4. Summary
This sub -section mainly looked at three demographic indicators. Ofthe three factors; the study has suggested that 
urbanisation and growing middle class population, serves as industry ‘pull’ factors, whereas the working age 
population poses as a challenge and acts as a ‘push’ factor. In any case these factors suggest a strong demand and 
significant growth the aviation industry needs to achieve to cater to their demands .
4.Discussion
The review of the various ‘push ’and ‘pull’ factors affecting the demand in terms of aviation industry has shown 
that the industry continues to grow despite a variety of extrinsic and intrinsi c variations and has established itself as 
that independent transport mode that represents a growing global community. This sector, over the last few decades Fig. 3 Annual traffic in terms of RPK (Global) (1965 -2015) [4]
8 Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9
Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017) 000– 000 7
continued to grow despite huge political and economic renaissance, resistant to all those changes, in other words 
predominantly ‘RESILIENT’.
The research undertaken covered three broad areas: social, economic and demographic, as indicated in the 
introductory chapters. The study included data collection and interpretation from civil passenger and freight aircraft 
sectors.  The 6.3 percent rise in income accounting to 7,015 billion RPK shows the continuous growth and exciting 
future expansion of the aviation industry owing to overall traffic growth in the sector [1]. The analysis of the data 
revealed that the propensity of travel, urbanisation, growing and expanding middle class population together with the 
creation of megacities of the future all constitute to form a pull factor. Whilst environmental awareness, working age 
population and some external shocks push the ind ustry sector, the assessment also highlighted that the airline business 
model has a negative outlook that contributes to the overall push factors. These factors and trends on the whole signal towards a positive and growing sector, and will continue to expa nd for the years to come. The analysis presented is 
primarily based on the analysis of data obtain from the public domain and are originally produced and presented by 
international regulatory  authorities and specific industrial organisations. For this ana lysis, a huge variety of statistics 
were considered, ranging from global demand to crude oil process and also include information ranging from 
economic growth to infrastructure expansion in an effort to provide a comprehensive picture to identify current p ush 
and pull factors that influence the aviation sector.
The review of current civil aviation regulations reveal that they are heavily driven by two major factors, the 
penchant of people to travel, be it business or for leisure and the other being environm ental regulations in place. The 
aviation traffic strongly supports the claim that the propensity of travel pulls the entire industry influencing and increasing the industrial demand. Policies such as the Chicago Convention 1944 and Civil Aviation Acts 2012 bear a 
testimony to the increase in air traffic. Continuous growth has also allowed progress in economy due to urbanisation, growing middle age and working age population and the likes. All of these, not just directly boost the economy of the 
industry, bu t also support markets and individual nations that provide a platform for trade and facilitates growth. With 
growth also comes a host of other issues such as safety, and security are controlled by policies such as the Montréal 
2014, Beijing 2010 and Aviation (Offences) Act 2003 to allow peaceful travel to take place between international borders and thus provide a safe and secure mode of transportation.
In order to maintain the demand, it is necessary for any industry to improve their manufacturing performa nce and 
business strategies through continuous research and innovation. Policies such as Flightpath 2050 [11] and European 
Aviation Strategy report [18] the need and level of innovation and research that helps meet the ever -growing demand 
of air travel. The other factor that helps and assists growth of the civil aviation industr y are the policies and roadmaps 
of competition that provide a healthy platform for the industry to provide, deliver and maintain high standards at all times. The policies such as the Aviation Strategy Report [18] and European Competitiveness Report (2011) [19]
provi de a roadmap on the current level of competencies achieved by various industries that support the aviation sector 
and ways to remain attractive at a global scale.
Table 3'Push' and 'Pull' factors that affect and influence demand
Push Pull
Environmental Awareness Propensity to travel
Working age population Urbanisation
External shocks Growing middle classes
Key economic indicators
Liberalisation
Airline’s business model
Environment and its awareness is one factor that pushes the industry even in times of increas ed demand. With the 
overarching policies such as the Environmental Protection Directives (EC D 2016/4; 2016/5) and policy framework on energy (COM/2014/015), there is huge push on the sector to cut pollutions levels with clear pressure to reduce it to 24% and 32% for 2020 and 2030 when compared with the 1990 levels.
Overall, the impact of the policies on the aviation sector have and will continue to contribute to the growth in air 
traffic and the industry will continue to remain resilient to changing geo -economical and geo -political landscape. The  Sri Addepalli  et al. / Procedia Manufacturing 19 (2018) 2–9 98 Author name / Procedia Manufacturing 00 (2017 ) 000– 000
industry will also be supported by the regulatory authorities who will continue to support the industry through 
effective regulations catering to the growing demands of the industry . The various factors have now be en tabulated 
below Table 3 .
5.Conclusion
The ability to capture the future demand for aircrafts has always been a challenging aspect for the travel industry. 
With the ever growing industry and the current disruptions that do not allow the industry to deliver the required number of aircrafts hugely affect the productivity of the industry as a whole. Industries are working with governments and academic research organisation to help meet both current and future challenges. This paper is an effort to address those top factors that mainly shape the demand for the sector. Moreover, identifying opportunities and threats is in itself a major contribution. This research mainly includes social- economic and demographic influences on the market. 
It is the n otion that, identification and establishment of these factors could help boost manufacturing productivity so 
that the demand is maintained at all times, both current and future especially for an industry that is hugely ‘pulling’ and ‘resilient’.
Acknowledg ements
This research was fund ed by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the 
grant agreement No. 724112 (SCORE) .
References
[1]ICAO, “Traffic growth and airline profitability were highlights of air transport in 2016,” 2017.
[2]ICAO, “JAN 2017 : Air Transport Monthly Monitor,” 2017.
[3]IATA, “Air Cargo Ends 2016 on a Positive Note,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr/Pages/2017 -02-01-01.aspx. 
[Accessed: 03 -Aug-2017].
[4]Airbus, “Global Market Forecast -Mapping Demand 2016- 2035,” 2016.
[5]Aerospace Growth Partnership, “Means of Ascent: The Aerospace Growth Partnership’s Industrial Strategy for UK Aerospace 2016, ” p. 44, 
2016.
[6]S. Baloglu and M. Uysal, “Market segments of push and pull motivations : A canonical correlation approach,” Int. J. Contemp. Hosp. Manag. ,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 32– 38, 1996.
[7]Boeing, “Current Market Outlook 2014- 2033,” 2015.
[8]Boston Consulting Group, “Understanding the Demand for Air Travel : How to Compete More Effectively,” 2006.
[9]Airbus GMF, “Global Market Forecast 2015,” 2015.
[10]Airports Council International, “ACI Media Release,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.aci.aero/News/Releases/Most-
Recent/2017/04/19/ACI -releases -preliminary -2016- world -airport -traffic- rankingsRobust -gains -in-passenger -traffic- at-hub-airports -serving -
transPacific- and-East- Asian -routes. [Accessed: 06 -Aug-2017].
[11]M. Darecki et al. , “Flightpath 2050,” Flightpath 2050 Eur. Vis. Aviat. , p. 28, 2011.
[12]International Air Transport Association (IATA), “Economic Performance of the Airline Industry,” pp. 1 –6, 2016.
[13]M. Smyth and B. Pearce, “Airline Liberalisation: Lessons from other ind ustries on the impact of removing operational, ownership and control 
restrictions,” 2007.
[14]Sabre Airline Solutions, “The Evolution Of The Airline Business Model - Technology and business solutions that give low -cost carriers the 
freedom to grow their b usinesses as they choose,” 2010.
[15]Boeing Commercial Airplanes Market Analysis, “Current Market Outlook 2016 -2035,” 2016.
[16]United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, “World Population Prospects: 2017 Revision,” New York, 2017.
[17]T.Stalnaker, U. Khalid, and A. Taylor, “Airline economic analysis,” 2016.
[18]European Commission, “An Aviation Strategy for Europe,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/air/aviation -
strategy_en#package_detai. [Accessed: 01- Feb-2017].
[19]European Commission, European Competitiveness Report. 2001.