Risk assessment techniques for civil aviation security
Galileo Tamasia, Micaela Demichelab,n
aEnte Nazionale per l’Aviazione Civile —Direzione Progetti, Studi e Ricerche, Via di Villa Ricotti, 42, 00161 Roma, Italy
bSAfeR—Centro Studi su Sicurezza, Afﬁdabilit /C18a e Rischi, Dipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali e Ingegneria Chimica, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24,
10129 Torino, Italy
article info
Article history:
Received 25 May 2009
Received in revised form
2 March 2011
Accepted 3 March 2011
Available online 8 April 2011
Keywords:
Civil aviation security
Airport security
Risk assessment
RAMS
Terrorist threatsabstract
Following the 9/11 terrorists attacks in New York a strong economical effort was made to improve and
adapt aviation security, both in infrastructures as in airplanes. National and international guidelines
were promptly developed with the objective of creating a security management system able to
supervise the identiﬁcation of risks and the deﬁnition and optimization of control measures.
Risk assessment techniques are thus crucial in the above process, since an incorrect risk
identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation can strongly affect both the security level as the investments needed
to reach it.
The paper proposes a set of methodologies to qualitatively and quantitatively assess the risk in the
security of civil aviation and the risk assessment process based on the threats, criticality and
vulnerabilities concepts, highlighting their correlation in determining the level of risk.
RAMS techniques are applied to the airport security system in order to analyze the protection
equipment for critical facilities located in air-side, allowing also the estimation of the importance of the
security improving measures vs. their effectiveness.
&2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The terrorist attack of September 11th 2001, observed from
a socio-economic, cultural and political point of view, had a
tremendous negative impact on air transport never seen before
in aviation, unparalleled in history [1–3].
Proper measures have soon been taken following the considera-
tions emerged after the attacks and most of they are listed in the
seventh edition of Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) [4,5]. Annex 17 is
the key document concerning aviation security and is the primary
Annex for security-related Standards and Recommended Practices.
ICAO realised immediately the urgency and the need for restoring
the integrity of the aviation system and met representatives from
32 nations to discuss new security measures. The ICAO has then
implemented 66 security standards and 16 Recommended Practices
(SRPs) and has recommended the Universal Security Audit Program
(USAP). USAP program promotes global aviation security through the
auditing of Contracting States o n a regular basis to determine the
status of implementation of ICAO Annex 17 security standards.Since 9/11, new measures have been taken in order to protect
the aircrafts from hijacking and sabotage threats and new
preventive methodologies have been developed to prevent
actions, which could threaten the aircraft security.
Other methods and innovative procedures are being developed
to improve the airport security system and to protect it from new
threats, such as the Laser Beams which could blind the pilots,
the use of Hand Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS)
and explosives which could shoot down the aircraft during the
landing or take-off procedures.
The heads of the aviation industry, such as ACI, IATA, IACA,
Airbus and Boeing have formed the Global Aviation Security Audit
Group (GASAG). They strongly afﬁrm that the security of the
aviation (AVSEC) is not only a responsibility of the civil aviation
industry, but also is a security problem of the nations. They have
also underlined the importance of government bodies and of the
intelligence in the control of the new emerging threats.
New countermeasures was suggested, included hundred per
cent baggage screening, explosives detection, biometric identiﬁ-
cation of passengers and, maybe, remote check-in, risk based
threat perception analysis and identiﬁcation of non-risk passen-
gers instead of the rarer risk-passenger, as well as in-ﬂight
measures like using Sky Marshals, strengthening cockpit doors
and cabin monitoring from within the cockpit [6–11].
Thus far, carrying arms has been banned, but the possibility of
arming, or, at least, training the crew in unarmed combat is beingContents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ressReliability Engineering and System Safety
0951-8320/$ - see front matter &2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ress.2011.03.009nCorresponding author. Tel.: þ390110904629; fax: þ390110904665.
E-mail addresses: g.tamasi@enac.rupa.it (G. Tamasi),
micaela.demichela@polito.it (M. Demichela).Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899seriously considered. Research is also ongoing to improve the
efﬁcacy of some of these countermeasures.
After 9/11 greater attention has been paid to what is estab-
lished in the Annex 17 in the ﬁeld of the security programs.
Particularly, the concepts of threat assessment and risk manage-
ment have been underlined. Both concepts lead to a basic
methodology able to face effectively the threats addressed to
the civil aviation system.
In the restricted Doc ICAO 8973 [12], the methodologies of threat
assessment and risk management are outlined. These methodologies
have both an analytical and semi-quantitative approach based
on numerical scores. However, ot her methodologi es can be applied
in aviation security and they will be delineated later in the
present paper.
2. Risk management and risk assessment for airport security
The current security measures in world airports cannot assure
total protection against every typology of threats, but an effective
risk management approach can prepare better against acts of
terrorism [13,14]. Security risk management is an analytical and
systematic process, which allows the evaluation of the probability
of a threat to result in a negative action towards an infrastructure,
people or critical functions of the airport system. Risk manage-
ment principles acknowledge that while risk generally cannot be
eliminated, enhancing protection from known or potential threats
can reduce it.
The risk management allows the detection of actions, which
could reduce the risk and mitigate the consequences of an attack.
The risk management allows to implement and to maintain
efﬁcient over time all countermeasures, gradually reducing the
risk, in view of a constant improvement, within acceptable values.
A good risk management approach lean on risk assessment
composed by three primary elements: a threat assessment, a
vulnerability assessment, and a criticality assessment.
A threat assessment identiﬁes and evaluates threats based on
various factors, including capability and intentions as well as the
potential lethality of an attack.
A vulnerability assessment is a process that identiﬁes weak-
nesses that may be exploited by terrorists and suggests options to
eliminate or mitigate those weaknesses. A criticality assessment
is a process designed to systematically identify and evaluate an
organization’s assets based on their values, the importance of its
mission or function, the group of people at risk, or the signiﬁcance
of a structure.
After the evaluation of the effectiveness of the security con-
trols, the risk assessment allows the evaluation of the potential
effects resulting from threats, with reference to each vulnerable
area. The risk assessment, therefore, is performed in order to
evaluate the risk associated to each critical element of the airport
and the loss related to the success of threats. In most cases, the
risk assessment procedure attempts to strike an economic bal-
ance between the impact of risks and the cost of security
solutions intended to manage them.
The analysis of the Annual Losses Expected (ALE) determined
through the risk assessment allows to take decision on the
amount of economic resources necessary to implement the
countermeasures. Of course, the cost of countermeasures is only
a percentage of the ALE’s. Besides, the countermeasures enables
the ALE’s to remain within acceptable risk limits.
3. Qualitative and quantitative risk assessment
Risk is a multifaceted issue and must be addressed with methods
that are appropriate for the decisions to be taken. Historically, riskassessment and risk management professionals have focused on
accident risks, natural hazard risks, business interruption risks,
project risks, and ﬁnancial risks. I n these areas, organizations have
used very systematic processe s and tools to understand and
prioritize these diverse risks, es pecially those with catastrophic
consequences.
Security related risks are another broad category of risks with
potentially catastrophic consequences, that after 9/11 has been
receiving signiﬁcant attention [15,16]. While security related risks
require a different approach than other types of risk, the same
fundamentals apply. Terrorist attacks and other unlawful acts are
a different type of threat, but they pose risks in much the same
way as other threats.
In a risk assessment carried on for the security in an airport,
the analysis has to underline:
/C15the level of the current risk,
/C15the possible consequences of attacks,
/C15the actions to be undertaken if the residual risk is superior to
the tolerable values.
The quantitative risk assessment can be subdivided in the
followings steps:
/C15Threat assessment
– Detection of the presence of hostile groups in the home
territory.
– Evaluation of the threat level in the nation.
– Evaluation of the threat level near airports.
/C15Vulnerability assessment
– Analysis of the critical points and the functional importance
of airport systems and infrastructures.
– Evaluation, within the system of airport security, of protec-
tion systems for every critical infrastructure and evaluation
of the accessibility and vulnerability levels.
/C15Criticality assessment
– Analysis of the potential accidental scenarios consequent to
the success of the attacks on critical targets.
– Analysis of the costs for the re-establishment of the critical
targets and evaluation of the missed indirect incomes
because of their unavailability.
– Evaluation of the economic losses related to every acciden-
tal scenario.
The quantiﬁcation can be done through the followings gen-
eralized relations:
Risk ¼Frequency ðFÞ/C2Consequence ðCÞð 1Þ
Frequency ðFÞ¼initiating event frequency
/C2probability all safeguards fail ð2Þ
Risk ¼½Threat ðTÞ/C2Vulnerability ðVÞ/C138 /C2Criticality ðCÞð 3Þ
Where Threat ( T) is a measure of the likelihood that a speciﬁc
type of attack will be initiated against a speciﬁc target (that is, a
scenario). Vulnerability ( V) is a measure of the likelihood that
various safeguards against a scenario will fail. Criticality ( C) is the
magnitude of the negative effects if the attack is successful. Fig. 1
shows the approach for the risk assessment.
One of the key challenges in deﬁning a framework for collect-
ing, organizing, and reporting the risk-based information is to
determine what level of precision is appropriate to support the
decisions to be taken.
In particular, the goal of this study was to propose a frame-
work for risk assessment able to support the decision making inG. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 893the design and/or optimization of protection levels for airport
security.
High or even medium precision may not necessarily be
achievable, particularly when the speciﬁc technology for achiev-
ing a given antiterrorism capability is not deﬁned or is under
development [17,18].
Several approaches can help accomplishing this objective.
Matrix based semi-quantitative approach can be based on
threat, vulnerability, and consequence categories that can be used
to capture security related risks information. Assigning numerical
scores to each category of threat and vulnerability and assigning
‘‘representative’’ loss estimates to the consequence categories will
provide a scoring system that will express the measure of risk in
terms of loss exposure, which can be directly compared to cost of
implementation, thus providing a meaningful beneﬁt/cost index
for relative ranking.
A mixed quantitative and semi-quantitative experimental risk
based design is experimentally ongoing in designing the new
security systems of Lampedusa and Pantelleria airports that are
managed directly by the ENAC, the Civil Aviation Authority, Italy.
The qualitative analysis, instead, which is at present conducted
in Italy, is based on Security Audit, primarily constituted by check
lists elaborated by ENAC on the indications of the current Italian
and European Community legislation.
The check lists and the inspective procedures are obviously
integrated in order to take into consideration the international
legislation and the technical security recommendations (ICAO,
ECAC, and IATA).The Security Audit particularly refers to the following areas:
/C15Organization and management of the security systems at
national level and cooperation with other states.
/C15Organization and management of the security systems at
airport level.
/C15Control of the access to the airport structures.
/C15Passengers and hand baggage.
/C15Hold baggages.
/C15Aircraft and ﬂight procedures.
/C15Cargo and catering.
/C15Ability to answer to illegitimate actions and contingency planning.
The results are given as predetermined levels of conformity to
the actual security standards. The level of vulnerability and the
necessary countermeasures to be implemented are expressed for
each airport area.
The qualitative risk survey is completed with a report submitted
to the airport management companies and to other subjects charged
with the security services who must solve the critical points shown
and ranked by the analysis within a ﬁxed temporal term.
4. Vulnerability and criticality analysis through modiﬁed
recursive HAZOP and Fault Tree Analysis
A vulnerability assessment is a process that identiﬁes weak-
nesses in physical structures, p ersonnel protection systems,Consider full range of 
potential scenarioSelect a Scenario
Characterize
Maximum
Consequence
Develop
Threat
 Scenarios
Assess
Criticality
For Scenarios
Characterize
Risk of Scenarios
Is
Risk Level 
<Tollerable 
Risk?End
YesNo
Handle Threats 
Known
Through intelligence
Assess
Threat
for ScenariosRearrange Scenarios
Considering
New ControlStrategies
Develop Risk Control
StrategiesRely on standard
Protections
Assess
Vunerability
For Scenarios
NoYesIs
Maximum
Consequence
<x ?
Fig. 1. Risk assessment approach.G. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 894processes, or other areas that may be exploited by terrorists and
may suggest options to eliminate or mitigate those weaknesses. For
example, a vulnerability assessment might reveal weaknesses in an
organization’s security systems o r unprotected key infrastructure
such as power supplies, ATC control towers, and electric facilities.
A criticality assessment is a process designed to systematically
identify and evaluate important assets and infrastructure in terms
of various factors, such as the mission and signiﬁcance of a target.
For example, power generators, radio navigation aids, computer
networks might be identiﬁed as ‘‘critical’’ in terms of their
importance to airport security, airport economic activity, and
airport safety. In addition, facilities might be critical at certain
times, but not others. For example, a runway when in use in
heavy air trafﬁc and low visibility conditions may represent an
important target. Criticality assessments are important because
they provide a basis for identifying which assets and structures
are relatively more important to protect from an attack.
The use of Reliability, Availability, Maintainability, and Safety
(RAMS) techniques in vulnerability and criticality assessment of
an airport is here described applying it to a key electrical facility
that is a vital part of equipments needed for the airport exercise.
The equipments are usually located in airside in the physical
areas. The physical areas usually present in the airport requiring
protection are shown in Fig. 2 .The airport perimeter fence is the ﬁrst physical defense and
together with technological systems is a fundamental component
of the airport security system. Inside the airport perimeter there
are other critical areas which are protected with further combina-
tions of technological systems.
The technological systems are connected through a centralized
architecture that manages the monitoring, the events and
the states of alarm. An example of simpliﬁed architecture is
illustrated in Fig. 3 .
In the case study the vulnerability and criticality of an airport
security protection system of an electric substation for power
supply the airﬁeld ground lighting and radio navigation aids has
been approached through the Recursive Operability Analysis
[18–20] and the Fault Tree Analysis. These methodologies allow
the examination of both logical and probabilistic behavior of the
protection system.
An electric substation dedicated to Airﬁeld Ground Lights (AGL)
and Radio Navigation Aids (RNA) is an important part of the airport
electrical systems and, together with other electric components, it
is of vital importance for the operations of every airport luminous
visual aids and of the radio navigation aids. The radio navigation
aids lead the aircraft to a precision instrumental approach to the
runway while the luminous visual aids allow the pilots to verify
the correctness of approach procedure. The unavailability of these
systems due to the lack of power supply makes the airport runway
unavailable and this, for the airports with only one runway, causes
the unavailability of the whole airport.
The immediate lack of power supply of radio navigation aids
and visual aids can cause severe anomalies in the air trafﬁc
system and can lead to an accidental sequence that could cause
air disaster as shown in Hazop analysis depicted in Table 1 . For
these reason the electrical network and the electric substation
could constitute the target of severe threats by external entity
aiming at disabling it through illegal actions.
The simpliﬁed sketch of the monitoring and protection sys-
tems of electric substation, subjected to the vulnerability assess-
ment, is illustrated in Fig. 4 .
The protection system can be considered as composed by:
/C15Physical perimeter fence with metallic enclosure.
/C15System of microwaves sensors.
 Fig. 2. The physical areas usually present in an airport.
AIRPORT INTEGRATED SECURITY SYSTEMHARDWARE
ROOMPRIMARY
OPERATIVE
ROOMSECONDARY
OPERATIVE
ROOMPERIMETER
PROTECTIONSVIDEO
SURVEILLANCEINTERNAL
PERIMETERACCESS
CONTROLSYSTEM
1
SYSTEM
N
DATA
NETWORKSYSTE
3
OTHER SYSTEM
INTEGRATIONSYSTEM
2
Fig. 3. Simpliﬁed security protection system architecture.G. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 895/C15System of perimeter video surveillance.
/C15Airside millimeter-wave radar.
/C15Surveillance patrol.
/C15Physical perimeter of electric substation and protection system
with sensitive wire.
/C15System of second internal perimeter video surveillance.
/C15Protection system of electrical facility internal area through
volumetric sensors.
The security systems above illustrated are predisposed to
identify the presence of external non-authorized entities in each
part of the airside in order to be able to immediately activate
suitable countermeasures.
A hostile entity, that wants to reach the electric substation, has
to disable or to avoid all the control systems already installed
outside and inside the airport. The vulnerability of the system is
obviously connected with its leaning to become unavailable after
an attack to some essential components of protection system is
carried out.
Through a Recursive Operability Analysis (ROA) is possible,
therefore, to examine in a better way the functionality of the
system and its ability to protect the potential targets.
Furthermore, it is possible to evaluate the differential vulner-
ability, in comparison to the conditions of normal operation, if
some components of the system are put out of order under attack.
The ROA allows the Fault Trees to be directly extracted by the
analysis tables, for the quantiﬁcation of the identiﬁed Top Events.
4.1. Recursive Operability Analysis
InFig. 5 , the ROA analysis related to the security protection
system in Fig. 4 is shown.
This analysis is related to the technological failure of the
protection systems and, at this stage, does not take into account
the voluntary damaging or by-passing carried on by airport
operators.
External Perimeter Defence 
Video Surveillance 1 
MicroWave Barrier 
Surveillance Patrols   
Millimeter Wave Radar 
Video Surveillance 2 Sensibile Wire System 
Electical 
Substation 
Fig. 4. Simpliﬁed scheme of monitoring and protection systems.
Deviation Causes Consequences Alarm Systems Automatic
Protection 
SystemsTop
Event
Bypass external 
enclosure Damage airport 
enclosure1 e n o Z e d i S r i A y r t n E
Entry Air Side Zone 1 Overcoming external 
perimeter Entry Air Side Zone 2 Microwave System 
Video Surveillance 
Entry Air Side Zone 2 Entry Air Side Zone 1 Entry Air Side Zone 3 Millimetric Radar 
Patrol Surveillance 
Entry Air Side Zone 3 Entry Air Side Zone 2 Entry Area Electric 
Facility Sensitive Wire 
Protection System
Video surveillance 
Entry Area Electric 
FacilityEntry Air Side Zone 3 Entry Electric Facility Volumetric Control 
System  TE1 
Unavailability Electrical 
FacilityAccessibility Electrical 
Facility Night Flights  Unavailability RWY for 
Unavailability 
Radioassistance and 
Luminous Visual Monitoring Electric 
TWR Facility TE2 &
Sabotage group 
presence 
Unavailability RWY Unavailability Electrical 
Facility Night Flights Anomaly Air Traffic 
ControlMonitoring TWR ATC   TE3 
Anomaly Air Traffic 
ControlUnavailability RWY Aircraft accident Aircraft Avionics   TE4 
Aircraft accident Anomaly Air Traffic 
ControlAir disaster Emergency Center 
Airport Monitoring  TE5 Rescue & Fire 
Fighting
Fig. 5. Recursive Operability Analysis.G. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 8964.2. Fault Tree Analysis
The Fault Tree for Top Event 1 (ref. Fig. 5 ) directly drawn from
the ROA tables was solved using ASTRA FTA Software [21–24] and
it is shown in Figs. 6 and 7 :
The reliability parameters used in numerical solution of the
Fault Tree are detailed in Table 1 .
Some probabilistic parameters are gathered from reliability data-
banks [25], the missing ones related to the airport security systems
was given by the producers of the hardware apparatuses. The cutsets
are listed according to their probabilistic importance in Table 2 .Through the simple model here described, it is possible to
analyze the two cutsets, that for an external hostile entity is very
difﬁcult to contemporarily disable both the operators of the
airport security center (E1) and the surveillance patrols (E1B)
and after to climb over the perimeter enclosure (E14).
It is much more simple to attack the monitoring network
(ERM), to climb over the monitoring enclosure (E14) and to reach
the electric substation deceiving the controls of the surveillance
patrols (E1B).
The initiating events are illustrated according to their impor-
tance in Table 3 .
Fig. 6. Astra Fault Tree —part 1.
Fig. 7. Astra Fault Tree —part 2.G. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 897This classiﬁcation allows, both in phase of design of a new
system and in phase of analysis or change of an existing system,
to understand which system needs to be improved.
With such analysis tools, the relative importance of system
components can be examined, with the possibility to improve
both the general architecture and the behavior of every sub-
system.
The analysis of the accessibility has shown, through the
examination of cuts sets, that a hostile group to have a successful
action needs to:
/C15know the facilities airport conﬁguration and the position of the
target,
/C15know the airport surveillance procedures,
/C15have knowledge of alarms network,
/C15have equipments to climb over the perimeter enclosure,
/C15have equipments to disable the alarm network,
/C15have weapons and tools to shoot the patrol controls,
/C15have weapons and tools to disable the electric substation.
After carrying out the structure vulnerability analysis and the
criticality analysis, we have also outlined the proﬁle of the hostile
external entity. The criticality analysis conducted also by ROA had
individualized (see Fig. 5 ) the consequences of an attack in terms
of economic losses, denial of service, negative image to passen-
gers. To complete the risk assessment procedure (see Fig. 1 )i ti s
necessary to evaluate the likelihood that the proﬁled entity has to
decide to attack the target.
By using the threat assessment, the risk assessment procedure
is completed then by deﬁning the likelihood that one speciﬁc
hostile entity has, under particular conditions, to attack and
overcome the protections of a vulnerable target, thus producing
consequences to which an economic value is associated.The results can be expressed as Annual Losses Expected (ALE)
and they are a good indicator in deciding the investments in
the security sector. The threat assessment methodology which
completes the risk assessment procedure will be shortly
illustrated soon.
5. Threat assessment
This last step is fundamental to perform a complete risk
assessment related to security aspects, but it is still a critical point
and characterized by large uncertainties and lack of objectivism.
A threat assessment is used to evaluate the likelihood of
terrorist activity against a given asset or location. It is a decision
support tool that helps to establish and prioritize security-
program requirements, planning, and resource allocations.
A threat assessment identiﬁes and evaluates each threat on the
basis of various factors, including capability, intention, and
lethality of an attack.
The deﬁnition of a realistic or real threat set to be taken into
account is delegated to the intelligence, and to the government
bodies (in Italy the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of
Interior). Nevertheless, the civil aviation authority contributes to
the identiﬁcation of the key elements to be kept into considera-
tion in the analysis.
In the identiﬁcation of threats addressed to the civil aviation
there are different sources of empirical evidence and of available
statistic data. They have to be valued considering every factor
which could result in a terrorist event.
The ICAO, e.g. has deﬁned a semi-quantitative methodology
which considers the presence in the nation of terrorist groups, the
historical records of aviation attacks, the level of internal strike,
the entity of the economic problems, the number of the airport
ﬂights and the number of high risk ﬂights. From elaboration of
these indicators which are numerically quantiﬁed in a matrix you
can have numerical scores which can be easily connected with the
likelihood of an attack.
Similarly, the probability that a group with speciﬁc character-
istics, ability, information and equipments is motivated to start a
predetermined terrorist action can be valued, as in the case of the
disabling of an electric substation underlined before.
6. Conclusions
A set of scenario attacks towards a speciﬁc target can be
investigated trough examination of its vulnerability and its
criticality.
Each potential scenario can be studied in order to have an
estimation of the current risk level, the evaluation of possible
economic losses on an annual base, and the set of the counter-
measures to adopt in order to reduce the risk.
The quantitative analysis carried out with RAMS methodolo-
gies has shown the possibility to investigate vulnerabilities and
criticality of the airport components. The use of the previous
analysis results, melted with the result of threat assessment
complete the risk assessment procedure. The procedure offer as
result the likelihood that an attack is successful in the selected
scenario, so, is possible to have the likelihood that the airport
have an economic loss and others serious problems. The cumu-
lative set of scenarios investigated deﬁne at the end of the process
the necessary indication to select suitable countermeasures also
in terms of economical investment.
The maintenance of countermeasures over time is a task of the
risk management and it is fundamental to protect the airport
infrastructures and to plan changes to airport security systems.Table 1
Primary events input data.
Event name Unavailability Description
E1 1.5000E-03 MI security operator
E10 1.0000E-03 MI microwave sensors alarm
E14 5.0000E-01 MI perimeter defense
E1B 1.0000E-02 MI patrol operators
E2 1.0000E-03 MI volumetric sensors alarm
E4 1.0000E-03 MI video surveillance
E6 1.0000E-04 MI sensitive wire alarm
E9 1.0000E-04 MI millimeter-wave radar alarm
ERM 1.0000E-05 MI alarms telematics network
Table 2
Minimal cutsets listed in order of probability importance.
# Q W Minimal cutsets
1 7.5000E-06 7.5000E-06 E1 E14 E1B
2 5.0000E-08 5.0000E-08 E14 E1B ERM
Table 3
Primary events listed in order of importance.
Event Importance Description
E1B 1.0000E þ00 MI patrol operators
E14 1.0000E þ00 MI perimeter defense
E1 9.9337E-01 MI security Operators
ERM 6.6225E-03 MI alarms telematics networkG. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 898The effectiveness of the quantitative techniques borrowed
from the industrial risk assessment for airport security purposes
has been demonstrated through their application to a simple case
study, that could be seen as a part of a complete and more
detailed analysis.
The optimized design of the airport security system, its ability
to innovate and to modify itself in consequence of the results of
risk assessment is surely the best indicator of the ability to
answer to the new incumbent threats and to assure an acceptable
security risk level to the passenger and airport operators.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express their thankfulness to
Prof. Norberto Piccinini (Politecnico di Torino) who initiated and
encouraged the present work, to Paolo Mazzaracchio of Civil
Aviation Authority, Italy —Airports Technologies Ofﬁce, for the
continuous and precious suggestions, to Roberto Passatore of Civil
Aviation Authority, Italy —Security Directorate, for his unique
indications, and last but not least to Mladen Cala of ICAO Security
International, for the signiﬁcant help in the research of references.
References
[1] Dillingham GL. Post-september 11th initiatives and long-term challenges.
New York: United States General Accounting Ofﬁce; 2004.
[2] Coughlin CC, Cohen JP, Khan SR. Aviation security and terrorism: a review of
the economic issues. In: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Working papers
2002-009A. St. Louis; 2004, p.1–16.
[3] Ito H, Lee D. Assessing the impact of the september 11 terrorist attacks on
U.S. airline demand. USA: Brown University Economics Department; 2003.
[4] Dillingham GL. Progress since september 11, 2001, and the challenges ahead.
New York: United States General Accounting Ofﬁce; 2003.
[5] ICAO. Annex 17. Annexes to the convention on international civil aviation.
Montreal: ICAO; 2002.
[6] Salter MB. SeMS and sensibility: security management systems and the
management of risk in the Canadian Air Transport Security Authority. Journal
of Air Transport Management 2007:389–98.
[7] Olapiriyakul S, Das S. Design and analysis of a two-stage security screening
and inspection system. Journal of Air Transport Management 2007:67–74.
[8] Gkritza K, Niemeier D, Mannering F. Airport security screening and changing
passenger satisfaction: an exploratory assessment. Journal of Air Transport
Management 2006:213–9.[9] Lazar Babu VL, Batta R, Lin L. Passenger grouping under constant threat
probability in an airport security system. European Journal of Operational
Research 2006:633–44.
[10] Eiceman GA, Schmidt H, Cagan AA. Explosives detection using differential
mobility spectrometry. Counterterrorist Detection Techniques of Explosives
2007:61–90.
[11] Xiaofeng Nie Rajan, Batta Colin G, Drury Li Lin. Passenger grouping with risk
levels in an airport security system. European Journal of Operational
Research 2009;194(2):574–84.
[12] ICAO. DOC 8973 restricted —security manual for safeguarding civil aviation
against Acts of unlawful interference, Annexes to the convention on inter-
national civil aviation. Montreal, Canada: ICAO; 2002. 2002.
[13] Decker Raymond J. Key elements of a risk management approach. New York,
USA: United States General Accounting Ofﬁce; 2003 October 12 2001.
p. 1–11.
[14] Moteff John. Risk management and critical infrastructure protection: asses-
sing, integrating, and managing threats, vulnerabilities and consequences.
Washington, USA: Congressional Research Service; 2004 September 2 2004.
p. 1-27.
[15] Jenkins BD. Security risk analysis and management, 1998. Hollywood, USA:
Countermeasures Inc; 1998 p. 1–16.
[16] Winther R, Johnsen O, Axel Gran B., Security assessments of safety critical
systems using HAZOPs, In: Proceedings of safecomp 2001. Budapest.
Hungary; 26–28 September 2001.
[17] Barry AS, Mazel DS. Airport perimeter security: where we’ve been, where we
are, and where we’re going, In: Proceedings of technologies for homeland
security, 2008 IEEE conference on digital object identiﬁer; 2008. p. 57–62.
[18] Piccinini N, Ciarambino I. Operability analysis devoted to the development of
logic trees. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 1997;55:227–41.
[19] Demichela M, Marmo L, Piccinini N. Recursive operability analysis of a
complex plant with multiple protection devices. Reliability Engineering and
System Safety 2002;77(3). September 2002, 301–308(8).
[20] Demichela M, Piccinini N, Ciarambino I, Contini S. How to avoid the
generation of logic loops in the construction of fault trees. In: Proceedings
of reliability and maintainability symposium, 2002. Seattle, WA, USA; 2002.
p. 178–85.
[21] Scheer S, Contini SM, Wilikens MA, Cojazzi GG, De Cola G. ASTRA, an
integrated tool set for complex systems dependability studies. Workshop
on tool support for systems speciﬁcation, development and veriﬁcation
(TOOLS ’98). Univ. Kiel. 2–4 June 1998. Malente (D) —ORA 41374; 1998.
[22] Scheer S, Contini SM, Wilikens MA. ASTRA FTA, a powerful software tool for
fault tree analysis —special publications/I.99.51. Ispra, VA, Italy: European
Commission, Joint Research Centre; 1999.
[23] Scheer S, Contini SM, Wilikens MA. ASTRA PTD, probabilistic time dependent
analysis module of ASTRA —Special Publications/I.99.50. Ispra, VA, Italy:
European Commission, Joint Research Centre; 1999.
[24] Scheer S, Contini SM, Wilikens MA. ASTRA-SAM, a powerful software tool for
on-line sensitivity analysis —special publications/I.99.49. Ispra, VA, Italy:
European Commission, Joint Research Centre; 1999.
[25] EIREDA. European industry reliability data handbook. C.E.C. —J.R.C./ICEI
21020 ISPRA (Varese) Italy. EDF-DER/SPT 93206 Saint Denis (Paris) France;
1991.G. Tamasi, M. Demichela / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 892–899 899