Preliminary Assessment of Alternative 
Navigation Means for Civil Aviation 
 
Sherman Lo, Per Enge, Stanford University 
Frederick Niles,  The MITRE Corporation 
Robert Loh, Innovative Solutions International 
Leo Eldredge, Mitchell Narins, Federal Aviation Administration 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is looking to develop alternative navigation means to global navigation 
satellite systems (GNSS) and GPS.  While the national 
airspace (NAS) includes many navigation systems such as 
distance measuring equipment (DME), VHF omni 
directional ranging (VOR), or non directional beacon 
(NDB), they are not capable to supporting the increased 
capabilities, capacity and efficient operations that GPS 
will provide.  Thus it is important to examine, design and 
develop new alternatives capable of providing similar level of service and operational efficiencies as GPS.  One 
idea is to develop alternatives based on existing or soon to 
be existing FAA systems and infrastructure.  The paper details a preliminary study on using FAA infrastructure 
such as DME and ground based transceiver (GBT) as 
building blocks for a future system.  The system is to be capable for providing navigation to support future needs 
of the NAS even in the event of GPS interference or 
outage. 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
The increasing integration of GPS and GNSS into critical 
infrastructure has created tremendous benefits.  In 
aviation, for example, the introduction of GPS avionics will lead to improved capacity and efficiency in the 
National Airspace (NAS).   Its use allows for closer 
spacing and more flexible pro cedures in the form of Area 
Navigation (RNAV) and Required Navigation 
Performance (RNP).  GPS also allows more accurate and 
frequent surveillance information as it is the predominant source of navigation information in Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-B).   
 Unfortunately, these benefits  goes away when GPS and 
GNSS becomes unavailable.  Vulnerabilities of GPS and 
satellite navigation are well known and documented, particularly by reports such as Volpe [1].  The concern is 
that once we rely on the operational benefits brought by 
the use of GPS, it may be difficult or impossible to revert 
to a without significant economi c loss and societal costs.  
The vulnerability of critical infrastructure and GPS is   addressed in Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 
(HSPD-7) and National Security Presidential Directive 39 
(NSPD-39), respectively [2][3].  NSPD-39 addresses the need to examine and mitigate GPS vulnerability, 
particularly where it is relied upon in critical 
infrastructure.  The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Navigation Services Directorate has been 
examining how to mitigate GPS vulnerability.  It has 
recently formed an Alterna tive Position Navigation and 
Time (APNT) group to provide a thorough investigation 
of navigation in the event GPS is unavailable.  The goal is 
to develop a means to maintain aviation operations indefinitely during a GPS interference or outage event.  
This entails minimizing th e economic impact of and 
maintaining safety during an outage event.  To accomplish this, an APNT system should provide en route 
capabilities over the conterminous United States 
(CONUS) as well as terminal and approach capabilities at economically important airports.      
 
One area that has been a fo cus for APNT is examining 
navigation alternatives based on infrastructure in the 
NAS.  The NAS infrastructure may be useful as building 
blocks for a future system capable for providing viable 
alternative navigation.  The infrastructure includes 
distance measuring equipment (DME) and ground based transceiver (GBT) for ADS-B.  While the group is 
examining other alternatives, this paper only covers the 
use of DME and GBT for APNT.  
OUTLINE 
 
This paper starts with some background on the APNT 
technical study.  It discusses the performance desired 
from an alternative navigation system that supports continued operations in the loss of GPS.  This is a critical 
first step to system de sign and constrains the 
infrastructure and designs that have utility.  
Additionally, the NAS infrastructure and design possible 
systems using these components are discussed.   Some 
background on DME and GBT is given.  Several possible 
architectures for us ing the infrastructure are detailed. 
 The paper concludes with accuracy coverage studies.  It 
examines the ability of the different architectures to meet 
RNP 1.0 for en route in CONUS and RNP 0.3 for 
terminal/approach at high traffic airports and areas. 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
ALTERNATIVE POSITI ON NAVIGATION & 
TIME (APNT) 
  
As previous mentioned, the APNT group is assessing 
alternate navigation means for aviation to mitigate the 
effects of GPS outage or interference.  The overall goal is to develop a comprehensive assessment that will lead to 
the development of an operational system.  As such, it 
will examine not just technical and performance aspects of alternative navigation means but also institutional, 
operational and development planning issues.  This paper 
is only focused on one part  of the technical efforts. 
 
TECHNICAL EVALUATION 
 
Technical evaluation seeks to develop and examine 
systems that can achieve the mission of the APNT group.  
This includes aspects of system design, as well as performance, and integrity analyses.  Specifically, the 
primary requirements of the system are to support en 
route (RNP 1.0) over CONUS and RNP 0.3 at required airports.  The short term goal is to narrow down to a few 
promising candidates for next phase of study.  Many 
systems such as enhanced Loran, iGPS and others have 
already been studied for this purpose and will be 
considered in the evaluation.  The focus of this paper is on 
developing systems based on current or some to be 
existing FAA infrastructure such as DME and GBT. 
Specifically, this paper examines the ability of different designs using these system s to meet the primary 
requirements. 
 
ALTERNATIVES & OPTIONS 
 
Several design alternatives and options are available.  
Infrastructure includes using DME and/or GBT ground   assets.  With these assets, several architectures have been 
proposed and developed.  This section will discuss the 
infrastructure, possible archit ectures, and the method for 
analysis.   
 
INFRASTRUCTURE  
 
DME is a two way or request-reply ranging system.  
Traditional  DME, known as DME/N, utilize pulse pairs 
between 962 to 1213 MHz to conduct this transaction.  
Each DME is assigned a frequency for uplink and another for downlink.  The difference between these two 
frequencies is 63 MHz.  The frequency is typically 
selected to minimize interference with other DMEs.   DME equipment is limited to about 3000 pulse pair per 
second resulting in a capacity of about 300 aircraft.  
Additional background on DME is given in [4].  Figure 1 
shows the current location of DME stations in  CONUS.  These are the locations  used in the analysis.   
Note that future plans will add a few additional stations to 
improve en route coverage.  
DME/N performance has been specified in a couple of 
standards.  ICAO annex 10 specifies DME/N accuracy as 
being 0.17 nautical miles (nm), 95% [5].  FAA Advisory 
Circular (AC90-100A) specifies a more complicated 
formulation where accuracy depends on signal in space 
(sis) and airborne receiver (ai r) [6].  This is seen in 
Equation 1 where 
sis is given as 0.05 nm.  The specified 
accuracy of the airborne receiv er is dependent on distance 
from the transmitter and is given in Equation 2.    
22
range air sis    (1)   
  max 0.085 ,.00125air nm d     (2) 
 
 
Figure 1.  DME station locations in CONUS 
 
Improved version of DME can have better performance.  For example, precision DME (DME/P) provides greater 
accuracy in part by using a di fferent pulse shape [7].   
However, the improvement is only at close range (within a few nautical miles) and is not available to DME/N 
users.  ICAO Annex 10 also specifies DME/P accuracies.  
Note that the study and coverage map does not show DME/P and approach DMEs.  Another example is that 
DME manufacturers have indicated newer DMEs can 
support higher limits on number of pulses.    
Modification to existing DME may be necessary to 
support some of the architect ures. One change may be the 
need to provide some data capability.  Another is 
increasing the limit on number of pulses.  Such potential 
modifications have been examined and are believed feasible.  The exact method and feasibility is still being 
worked on and is beyond the scope of this paper.  
Additionally, we will also consider reasonable 
improvements for these systems such as better ranging or 
data capacity.  The installation of a few additional stations and use of DME/P will also be considered.  
 
 
Figure 2. Proposed GBT station locations in CONUS  
 
Ground based transceivers (GBT) are the basic ground 
element supporting automatic dependent broadcast- 
surveillance (ADS-B).  GBTs receive aircraft broadcasted ADS-B reports and sends the in formation to air traffic.  
Additionally, GBTs can transmit traffic information 
services broadcast (TIS-B) and other flight information 
services broadcast (FIS-B) to nearby aircraft.  There are 
two basic ADS-B communication protocols: 1090 Extended Squitter at 1090  MHz and Universal Access 
Transceiver (UAT) at 978 MHz [8][9][10].  Figure 2 
shows the proposed locations for GBT in CONUS.  There are about 800 planned sites.  The locations of the actual 
installed sites may differ from the plan. 
 APNT has examined basic ways of modifying these GBT 
to support the ranging and positioning methods discussed 
next.  Preliminary study indicat es that there are feasible 
methods to achieve ranging.  The difficulty of achieving 
the implementation depends on both the method and data 
channel.  As GBT transmissions were not developed for ranging, range accuracy is not known.  For the 
preliminary analysis, GBT ranging performance is 
assumed to be similar to that of DME.  Additionally, it is assumed that they have the same coverage profile as a 
DME transmitter.  While these two assumptions are likely 
not precisely true, they are adequate for initial analysis. 
 
With these infrastructures, mu ltiple configurations are 
possible.  Four options are to use the current DME sites 
only, the GBT sites only, both DME and GBT sites, or all 
sites with a few reasonable additions to the infrastructure.  The final option is conceivable as it is possible to field 
both DME and GBT at locations such as cellular towers.  
The addition of a few such sites could be useful for improving coverage in vital areas (such as a busy airport).  
ARCHITECTURES 
 
With the infrastructure, there are several architectures that can be developed for navigation. Three possible 
architectures are: 1) Broadcas t, 2) Request-Reply and 3) 
Hybrid.  Additionally, positioning in these architectures can be aircraft based or ground based.  In aircraft based, 
the aircraft determines positions from measurements that 
it makes.  In ground based, the FAA calculates the aircraft position from measurements made on the ground and 
transmits it to the aircraft.  The position transmission is an 
additional step over aircraft based design and may need 
security such as encrypti on to prevent spoofing.  
However, the payoff for ground based designs is that it could minimize the changes required on board the aircraft 
to have APNT.  This enhances adoption of the 
technology.  
The first architecture is broadcas t.  In this architecture, the 
aircraft position can be derived with only one party sending a broadcast.  In an aircraft based design, the 
ground infrastructure will broadcast in a time coordinated 
manner.  Given DME and GBT will be used, the broadcast will likely be time multiplexed.   The aircraft 
will then be able to calculate pseudo ranges to each 
station that it receives a broadcast.  Hence, it operates like GPS or GPS pseudolites.  In a ground based design, the 
aircraft broadcasts.  The broadcast is then received by 
multiple, time synchronized ground stations.  The reception by each ground stati on results in a pseudo range 
to the aircraft which is then used to determine position.  
With the position transmitted back to aircraft.  This 
technique, known as multilateration, has been utilized and 
has been tested in several locations using ADS-B.  The broadcast architecture is passive and so has very high 
capacity.  However, it requires the ground to be time 
synchronized and needs a mini mum of three stations for 
horizontal positioning since pseudo ranges are used. 
 
Another potential architecture is request-reply or traditional two way ranging.  Utilizing this architecture 
begins by having one party sends a request or 
interrogation.  Once the second party receives the request, it transmits a response after a known delay.  The first 
party then calculates range fr om reception of the reply.  
DME operates in this fashion and an aircraft based design using request-reply should operate similar to DME.  A 
ground base design is similar to the ranging function 
performed by secondary surveillance radars (SSR).  A SSR queries an aircraft an d calculates distance to the 
aircraft from the reply.  Becau se of the interactive nature 
of request-reply, there is limited capacity.  However, the 
minimum number of measurements need for horizontal 
positioning is only two as we have true range measurements. 
 Ideally, we would like a system with high capacity while 
requiring only two stations for positioning.  High capacity 
is needed to support for crowded airspaces such as New 
York or Los Angeles.  Reducing the number of stations needed for positioning is vital for approach.  DME and 
GBT are line of sight (LOS) systems and the number of 
stations visible decreases with altitude.  As a result, we developed hybrid architectures. 
 
Hybrid architectures contain some aspects of both the 
previous architecture.  Transforming pseudo ranges to 
true ranges requires knowing the time offset between the 
ground and the aircraft.  Th is can be accomplished using 
two way communications between the aircraft and the 
ground.  Afterwards, the broadcast approach can be used for as long as the ground and aircraft clocks are 
synchronized.  This minimizes the number of two 
communications required while only needing a minimum of two required station for horizontal positioning.  
However, it also requires the ground to be time 
synchronized and increases system complexity.  
ORGANIZING THE ACCURACY ANALYSIS 
 
With so many options possible, it is necessary to develop 
a methodology to analyze the potential systems 
architectures in an organized and manageable manner.  As 
such, we take three steps.  First, the architectures are 
grouped into two basic categorie s.  The second step is to 
generalize the analysis by parameterizing by ranging accuracy.  The third step is to examine the base level of 
requirements.  This means starting with the basic 
infrastructure (DME only, DME and GBT) and one flight 
level for each of two basic operations (en route, 
approach).    
ARCHITECTURE 
 
The architectures can be organized into two basic 
categories: true range and pseudo range based.  The 
request-reply and hybrid
 architectures utilize true range 
and require a minimum of two stations for horizontal 
position.  The broadcast architectures are pseudo range 
based and require a minimum of three stations for positioning. 
 
PARAMETERIZING BY ACCURACY 
 
One major difference between the architectures is ranging 
accuracy.  The categorization ab ove allows us to perform 
analysis with range accuracy being a sensitivity 
parameter.  This is accomplished by developing dilution 
of precision (DOP) coverage maps based on the basic 
categories.   A MITRE DME coverage tool was used to 
generate such DOP maps.  This tool utilizes high resolution digital terrain elevation data (DTED Level 1) 
as well as standard models for DME propagation model, performance and coverage.  With the DOP map, we can 
determine the positioning accuracy as a function of 
ranging accuracy as seen in Equation 3. 
 
22
pos range air sis DOP DOP    (3) 
 
However, having positioning error is only one step the 
determining if RNP accuracy is met.  RNP level is the 
total system error (TSE) accuracy (95%).  For example, RNP 0.3 means the 95% TSE level is at or below 0.3 
nautical miles.  TSE is the sum of flight technical error 
(FTE) and navigation system error (NSE).  The position 
error gives the NSE.   FTE depends on the airframe and 
the flight system.  For the initial analysis, FTE from RTCA document DO-208 is used.  A basic summary is 
seen in Table 1 [11].  More extensive models are provided 
for each airframe and flight in strument as seen in Boeing 
documents [12]. 
 
Source/Air 
frame 737 747-400 757/767 777 DO-208 
Manual with 
MAP 0.15/0.208 0.402 0.5 0.5 0.5 
LNAV with 
FD 0.05/0.073 0.206 0.206 0.206 0.25 
LNAV w. 
autopilot 0.025/0.068 0.088 0.088 0.088 0.125 
Table 1.  FTE assumptions (in nm) form various air 
frame documents and DO-208 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE & FLIGHT ALTITUDES 
 
Two infrastructure options are used in the initial analysis.  
DME sites only represent the base case of using one 
system.  Additionally, using DME also represents the baseline case.  This case will also provide some indication 
of the performance of using GBT sites only as there is a 
similar density of GBT stations.  The second case is to examine using both DME and GBT sites.  This will 
indicate what is achievable if both systems can be used 
together.  Additionally, seeing where the coverage of this case fails will help us determine if the addition of a few 
extra stations will be beneficial. 
 Several flight levels (FL) need to be supported to provide 
en route or approach capabilities.  For the initial analysis, 
we used 5000 feet above ground level (AGL) for en route.  
This altitude is envisioned as the lowest needed to support 
en route.  It also represents a worst case scenario as the number of visible DME and GBT decreases with altitude.  
For approach, 500 feet AGL was used as it is near the 
minimum altitude for RNP 0.3.  
COVERAGE ANALYSIS 
 
The methodology allows to us organize the analysis in a 
meaningful manner.   This section presents the coverage analysis results for en route over CONUS and approach at 
two major airspaces: San Francisco Bay Area and 
Washington DC. 
 
CONUS AT 5000 FT AGL 
 
The first case to consider is the en route over CONUS.  
We begin by examining the DOP coverage for each architecture and infrastructure.  Figure 3 shows the DOP 
coverage for true range architectures when using DME 
and GBT ground infrastructure. 
 
 
Figure 3. CONUS DOPs for True Range at 5000 ft 
AGL with DME & GBT 
 
The target operation for th e en route airspace over 
CONUS is RNP 1.0.  For RNP 1.0, a total system 
accuracy (95%) of 1 nm must be achieved.  Some of the 
error is due to FTE and a value of 0.25 nm (1 ), 
equivalent to roughly 0.5 nm (95%), is used.  This value 
is consistent with standards such as DO-208 and AC90-
100A.  For ranging, range = 0.17 nm is used.  This value 
is the worst expect performance of DME given the 
standards.  Figure 4 shows the RNP coverage for true 
range architectures provided both DME and GBT stations 
are used.  The results show that coverage for RNP 1.0 
essentially follows that of the DOP (down to the 
resolution of the plots).  In examining each case, it was found that given the assumptions on FTE and range 
accuracy, the DOP coverage (DOP <= 5) and RNP 1.0 is 
essentially the same.  Figure 
5, Figure 6 and Figure 7 
show the DOP coverage for the scenarios true range with 
DME only, pseudo range with DME and GBT, and 
pseudo range with DME only, respectively.  From these 
figures, it can be seen that all have coverage holes.  However, the coverage holes of the pseudo range, DME 
only scenario is very signif icant and likely not acceptable. 
 
 
Figure 4. RNP coverage in CONUS for True Range at 
5000 ft AGL with DME & GBT 
 
 
Figure 5. CONUS DOPs for True Range at 5000 ft 
AGL with DME 
 
 
Figure 6. CONUS DOPs for Pseudo Range at 5000 ft 
AGL with DME & GBT 
 
  
Figure 7. CONUS DOPs for Pseudo Range at 5000 ft 
AGL with DME only  
The results are summarized in Table 2.  The summary 
indicates the method and a judgment on the amount of coverage gaps based on the evaluation.  The 
architecture/infrastructure co mbinations are ranked from 
1 to 4 in descending order of coverage.  
 
DME & GBT 
True Range 
(Request-Reply, Hybrid) 
A few coverage gaps (1) DME only 
True Range 
(Request-Reply, Hybrid) 
Some coverage gaps (2) 
DME & GBT 
Pseudo Range 
(Broadcast) 
Some coverage gaps (3)  DME only 
Pseudo Range 
(Broadcast) 
Significant coverage gaps (4)  
Table 2. CONUS Results 
 
APPROACH AT 500 FT AGL 
 
The other consideration is approach and supporting RNP 
0.3 in the terminal area.  For the initial study, a few major 
airports were examined.  Two areas with multiple major airports were used.  The San Francisco bay area has three 
major airports in San Francisco (SFO), Oakland (OAK), 
and San Jose (SJC) International.  The Washington D.C. 
area also has three major airports – Dulles (IAD), 
National (DCA), and Baltimore-Washington (BWI) International.  As the minimum altitude for coverage can 
vary, a value of 500 ft AGL was selected is as a 
reasonable approximation to the minimum altitude.  
The analysis examines the resulting RNP coverage given 
different level of ranging errors.  Two levels, 
range = 
0.085 nm and 0.17 nm, are first examined as they 
represent the smallest and largest level of random error from the standards.  Another value to determine is the 
maximum allowable level of ranging error that will 
provide acceptable RNP 0.3 cove rage about the airport.  
For the preliminary analysis, the determination is partly 
subjective and examines just  the area about the airport 
without consideration to the specific approaches utilized.  More detailed analysis will involve overlaying the 
approaches for each airport.  The maximum range error 
allows us to make some comparisons between the 
different options with one metric.  
SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA 
 
The San Francisco bay area was selected both due to the 
density of major airports in the vicinity and the 
mountainous terrain.  The terrain makes coverage challenging for line of sight transmissions such as DME 
and GBT. 
 
 
Figure 8. RNP 0.3 coverage using true range 
architecture and DME & GBT sites ( range = 0.085 nm) 
 
 
Figure 9. RNP 0.3 coverage using true range 
architecture and DME & GBT sites ( range = 0.17 nm) 
 
The most optimistic case is th at of a true range system 
using both DME and GBT sites.  Figure 8 and Figure 9 
show the RNP 0.3 coverage for range = 0.085 nm and 0.17 
nm range error.  RNP 0.3 coverage seems adequate for the 
range = 0.085 nm case with the exception of perhaps SJC 
from the southeast.  If range is increased to 0.17 nm, RNP 
0.3 coverage at the airports  considered is essentially 
eliminated.  Further study shows that to support RNP 0.3 
for all airports (with the exception of SJC from the southwest), the maximum allowable ranging error is 
roughly 0.10 nm.  It turns out that regardless of the 
method used, additional coverage is needed to support 
SJC from the southeast.  Given this, SJC from the southeast is not considered when determining the 
maximum range error for RNP 0.3 coverage in all cases. 
 Next, we examine the true range scenario using only 
DME.  Figure 10 and Figure 11 show the RNP 0.3 
coverage for 
range = .085 nm and 0.17 nm range error, 
respectively.  The results are similar to the previous case.  
Again, analysis indicates that  to support the RNP 0.3, the 
maximum allowable ranging error is roughly 0.10 nm. 
 
 
Figure 10. RNP 0.3 coverage using true range 
architecture and DME sites only ( range = 0 .085 nm)  
 
 
Figure 11. RNP 0.3 coverage using true range 
architecture and DME only sites ( range = 0.17 nm) 
 
Pseudo range architectures have worse coverage due to 
the requirement of having an additional station.  Figure 12 
and Figure 13 show the RNP 0.3 coverage given range = 
0.085 nm for the architecture with DME & GBT and 
DME only, respectively.  RNP 0.3 is very limited in these two cases.  In fact, to provide reasonable RNP 0.3 coverage, the maximum allowable ranging error is much 
lower – 0.06 nm or less.  Even with this ranging accuracy, 
there will still be coverage holes around each airport for 
the DME only infrastructure as seen in the plots.  
 
Figure 12. RNP 0.3 coverage using pseudo range 
architecture and DME & GBT sites ( range = 0.085 nm) 
 
 
Figure 13. RNP 0.3 coverage using pseudo range 
architecture and DME sites only ( range = 0.085 nm) 
 
DME & GBT 
True Range 
0.10 nm  DME only 
True Range 
0.085 nm  
DME & GBT+ 
Pseudo Range 
0.06 nm  DME only* 
Pseudo Range 
0.06 nm  
Table 3. Summary Results for San Francisco 
 
Table 3 summarizes the results for approach in the major 
airports of the San Francisco bay area.  It shows each 
combination of architecture a nd infrastructure along with 
the estimated maximum allowa ble ranging error that can 
still provide reasonable RNP 0.3 coverage.  There are 
additional caveats for the pseudo range cases.  For pseudo ranging with DME and GBT, SJC cannot be supported 
(
+).  For pseudo ranging with DME only, there are coverage holes around each airport (and SJC cannot be 
supported) (*).   
 
WASHINGTON DC AREA 
 
The Washington DC area was also examined.  The results 
were similar to those found previously for San Francisco 
though the performance was generally a little better since 
its terrain is less rugged.  Figure 14  shows an example 
plot from the DC area.  It shows the performance of the 
true range architecture when using DME and GBT with 
range = 0.17 nm.  Table 4 summarizes the results in a 
similar manner as Table 3.  Again, there are some caveats.  
For true ranging with DME only, there are coverage holes 
around BWI and IAD (+).  For pseudo ranging with DME 
only, there is no coverage at BWI and IAD (*).  As seen 
from the results, the maximum allowable ranging error for 
RNP 0.3 coverage can be a little higher in the DC area.  
This is expected as the area  has fewer terrain features 
obstruct the LOS to ground stations at low altitudes. 
 
 
Figure 14. RNP 0.3 coverage using true range 
architecture and DME & GBT sites ( range = 0.17 nm) 
 
DME & GBT 
True Range 
0.12 nm  DME only+ 
True Range 
0.085 nm  
DME & GBT 
Pseudo Range 
0.085 nm  DME only* 
Pseudo Range 
0.085 nm  
Table 4. Summary Results for Washington DC 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS  
 
This paper examines some of the options being studied by 
the FAA to provide alternative navigation to GNSS.  The 
paper focuses on systems based on existing or soon to be existing FAA infrastructure such as DME and GBTs.  
Specifically, the preliminar y analysis examines the 
coverage performance of systems using these elements to support RNP 1.0 through CONUS and RNP 0.3 approach 
capabilities to vital airports.   
 
Three architectures were studied. Depending on implementation, the position solution can be calculated 
either in the aircraft or by the ground for any of the 
architectures studied. One architecture is to use passive ranging which yields pseudo ranges. Three pseudo ranges 
are needed to derive a horizontal position solution.  
Another means is request-reply or two way ranging.  This reduces the number of requ ired measurements to two 
since it yields true ranges.  However, its capacity is 
limited.  The third means is hybrid technique whereby 
passive ranging is suppleme nted by occasional two way 
communications is used to synchronize the aircraft with the ground transmitters.  This provides for capacity 
benefits.  Since true ranges are derived, only two 
transmitters are needed for horizontal positioning.   
Performance and coverage was assessed for both en route 
in CONUS and for approach at several airports.  The result for en route is promising as only one technique 
(pseudo range with DME infrastructure) has extensive 
RNP 1.0 coverage gaps for en route at 5000 ft AGL.  Both the San Francisco and Washington DC areas were used 
for the airport study.  With the true range based 
techniques, RNP 0.3 around the airport seems achievable without significant improvement in DME range accuracy.  
For the pseudo range method, DME range accuracy will 
need to improve.    
The analysis presented here is not meant to be conclusive.  
Rather, it is an initial analysis meant to provide a general 
idea of the performance level.  For example, the currently 
existing DME and planned GBT sites were used for the analysis.  Future FAA plans include adding a few more 
DME to fill in some en route gaps.  Furthermore, other 
changes and features such as approach DMEs were not initially included in the analysis.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors would like to thank the FAA Navigation 
Services Directorate for supporting this work.  We would also like to acknowledge the rest of the APNT Team for 
their inputs. 
 
DISCLAIMER 
 
The views expressed herein ar e those of the authors and 
are not to be construed as official or reflecting the views 
of the Federal Aviation Administration or Department of 
Transportation. 
 
REFERENCES 
 [1] John A Volpe National Transportation Systems 
Center, Vulnerability Assessment of the Transportation 
Infrastructure relying on the Global Positioning System, 
Final Report, August 29 2001  
[2] Office of the Press Secretary, The White House, 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 7 (HSPD-7): Critical Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization, and 
Protection, December 17, 2003 
 [3] Office of the Press Secretary, The White House, 
National Security Presidential Directive 39 (NSPD-39): 
U.S. Space-Based Position, Navigation, and Timing 
Policy, December 8, 2004 
 [4] Myron Kayton, Walter R. Fried, “Avionics 
Navigation Systems,” Wiley Interscience, 2nd Edition, 
1997  
[5] International Civil Aviation Organization, “Annex 10 
to the Convention on International Civil Aviation: Aeronautical Telecommunications”, Volume 1: Radio 
Navigation Aids, 6
th Edition, July 2006. 
 [6] Federal Aviation Administration, AFS-400 
“Advisory Circular,”  No. 90 -100A,  U.S. Terminal and 
En Route Area Navigation (RNAV) Operations, September 2007 
 
[7] Braasch, M., "Current Developments in Signal 
Modeling of the Precision Distance Measuring 
Equipment", Master's Thesis, Ohio University, 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
Athens, Ohio, November 1989. 
 [8] RTCA Special Committee 186, “Minimum Aviation 
System Performance Standards for Automatic Dependent 
Surveillance Broadcast (ADS ‑B),” Document No. 
RTCA/DO-242A, 2002 
 [9] RTCA Special Committee 186, “Minimum 
Operational Performance Sta ndards for Universal Access 
Transceiver (UAT) Automatic Dependent Surveillance – 
Broadcast,” Document No. RTCA/DO-260B, 2009  
 [10] RTCA Special Committee 186, “Minimum 
Operational Performance Sta ndards for Universal Access 
Transceiver (UAT) Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast,” Document No. RTCA/DO-282B, 2009 
 
[11] RTCA Special Committee 159, “Minimum 
Operational Performance Standards for Airborne 
Supplemental Navigation Equipment Using Global 
Positioning System (GPS),” Document No. RTCA/DO-208, 1991  
 [12] Boeing CNS/ATM Focused Team (C/AFT) 
Reference Docs Boeing Airplane documents, by model 
airliner available at: 
 http://www.boeing.com/comme rcial/caft/reference/docum
ents/newdocs.htm 
 