1
Towards Robust and Efficient Communications
for Urban Air Mobility
Dennis Becker1, Lukas Schalk1,
1Institute of Communications and Navigation, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany
Abstract
For the realization of the future urban air mobility, reliable information exchange based on robust and efficient communication
between all airspace participants will be one of the key factors to ensure safe operations. Especially in dense urban scenarios,
the direct and fast information exchange between drones based on Drone-to-Drone communications is a promising technology for
enabling reliable collision avoidance systems. However, to mitigate collisions and to increase overall reliability, unmanned aircraft still
lack a redundant, higher-level safety net to coordinate and monitor traffic, as is common in today’s civil aviation. In addition, direct
and fast information exchange based on ad hoc communication is needed to cope with the very short reaction times required to avoid
collisions and to cope with the the high traffic densities. Therefore, we are developing a D2D communication and surveillance system,
called DroneCAST, which is specifically tailored to the requirements of a future urban airspace and will be part of a multi-link
approach. In this work we discuss challenges and expected safety-critical applications that will have to rely on communications for
UAM and present our communication concept and necessary steps towards DroneCAST. As a first step towards an implementation,
we equipped two drones with hardware prototypes of the experimental communication system and performed several flights around
the model city to evaluate the performance of the hardware and to demonstrate different applications that will rely on robust and
efficient communications.
Index Terms —unmanned aviation, urban air mobility, drone-to-drone communications, collision avoidance, measurements, flight
demonstration
NOMENCLATURE
AGC Automatic Gain Control
CNPC Control and Non Payload Communication
COTS Commercially off the Shelf
DAA Detect and Avoid
DroneCAST Drone Communication and Surveillance Technology
D2D Drone-to-Drone
GBAS Ground Based Augmentation System
GPSDO GPS Disciplined Oscillator
LOS Line of Sight
SDR Software Defined Radio
SNR Signal to Noise Ratio
UAM Urban Air Mobility
UTM Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management
1 Introduction
In the near future, the urban airspace will be shared by
piloted as well as unpiloted and autonomous aircraft, so-
called drones. Current airspace management concepts, such
as SESAR U-Space [1] and NASA UTM [2], rely on a
reliable exchange of information between all participants for
a safe integration of the new participants in urban airspace.
In particular, unpiloted aircraft such as drones depend on this
data exchange. Although robust communication is a central
aspect of all concepts, there is currently no communication
system that has been adapted to the specific challenges of this
environment. In addition, due to the high density of drones,
the management of urban airspace, called Unmanned Aircraft
System Traffic Management (UTM), will be fundamentally
different from the way it is currently handled in civil aviation.
Continuous remote control of all the drones by a remote
pilot in communication with UTM will not be possible dueto the high traffic density and short reaction times needed
to avoid collisions. Instead, UTM will heavily rely on pre-
planned and conflict-free trajectories as well as continuous
monitoring. Drones will fly these trajectories in an automated
or autonomous manner. The implementation of this UTM
concept will rely, at least in part, on existing communications
infrastructure, such as mobile communication in order to
connect the drones to the UTM [3] . Under ideal conditions,
this approach may seem sufficient. However, upon closer
inspection, weaknesses quickly become apparent, such as a
lack of redundancy or a lack of an overarching safety net, as
is common in civil aviation and shipping, or as is envisioned
for future autonomous driving [4]–[7] .
But the urban environment is very challenging from a physical
layer point of view, with rich multipath signal propagation as
well as shadowing and diffraction events when flying close to
surrounding objects such as tall buildings. Therefore, we are
developing an ad hoc communication concept that is adapted
to the specific challenges of the urban environment and takes
into account the requirements of the potential applications.
The ad hoc communication concept refers to the technical
communication on the air interface between different nodes
and is designed as a redundant data link in addition to other
communication options in the context of a multi-link approach.
2 Challenges and Applications for Communi-
cation Systems for Urban Air Mobility
Communication systems for use in urban airspace face
unique challenges that must be considered when selecting an
appropriate system. The expected high density of drones mustarXiv:2309.08796v1  [eess.SP]  15 Sep 20232
be considered along with high mobility in three-dimensional
space and rapidly changing topologies. Communication re-
sources are limited and must be shared by all participants,
whether airborne or ground based. The efficient use of re-
sources and scalability is critical. In urban environments, the
transmitted electromagnetic signals are reflected, scattered and
diffracted by many surrounding objects such as buildings,
vegetation and cars like illustrated in fig. 1 The multipath
propagation of the signal can cause unfavorable overlap at the
receiver and must be taken into account during reception to
allow reconstruction of the transmitted signal. In addition, such
interference can also be expected between different signals of
the participants, especially in the air, where there is a high
visibility between the vehicles and possible communication
infrastructures in a dense space [8]. In addition, direct signal
propagation can be expected to be shadowed by larger objects
such as buildings at lower altitudes, so that only reflected and
diffracted components can be received. Influences from the air-
craft itself, such as shadowing from their frame, electrical and
mechanical sources of interference, must also be considered.
Fig. 1: Major signal propagation effects to consider in the
urban D2D communications channel.
The layout of the aircraft’s capability may also lead to
possible limitations in terms of size, weight and power con-
sumption, known as SWaP constraints. This must then be taken
into account in the choice of the transceiver performance.
In addition, the requirements of various applications and
future regulations in the field of urban air mobility are not
yet well known. Figure 2 provides an overview of several
other categories that interact with communications in the
urban airspace and may need to be considered. In addition
to the specific signal propagation effects already mentioned,
any application that requires information exchange with the
airborne vehicles may also place direct requirements on the
communication system. For example, a certain amount of data
must be transmitted within a certain time, the data link must
be highly available, or a minimum number of subscribers,
i.e., scalability, must be ensured. There may also be indirect
requirements or influences on the communication system. For
example, a command or important information for an aircraft
to avoid an obstacle may need to be provided in a more timely
manner if the aircraft is traveling faster, if the aircraft is verysluggish in the evasion obstacles, or has a limited mobility.
Also, if position accuracy is degraded, increased separation
and other separation rules may need to be applied, requiring
more timely or frequent information exchanges. An on-board
autonomy system may need to send information back to UTM,
depending on the level of autonomy, or require certain clear-
ances that may not be automated. Required security measures
also mean increased data exchange and data volume. More
broadly, various environmental factors place demands on the
communications system. Weather, for example, can degrade
signal propagation conditions or affect flight performance,
such as in the case of strong wind gusts. In addition, events
such as bird strikes may require active detection and transmis-
sion of critical information to the aircraft.
However, for communication in urban environments, col-
lision avoidance in densely populated airspace will be a
key application, as reliable and decentralized exchange of
position data and trajectories between individual drones will be
required. In this context, there is a high demand for the lowest
possible transmission latency to enable the shortest possible
reaction times.
3 Multi-link Approach for Robust Communi-
cation
To realize the upcoming UAM, a wide variety of appli-
cations will be used, each with different requirements on
communication. It is therefore very difficult for a single com-
munication system to cover the wide range of requirements.
Therefore, we pursue a multi-link approach, i.e. a combination
of different data links, as it is also aimed at in other concepts
[2], [9]–[11]. A multi-link approach combining different data
link technologies has many advantages over a single data
link. The increase in redundancy and the increase in the
performance of the overall system are the key aspects here.
In addition, the initial effort required for the step-by-step
implementation of applications such as U-Space Services is
reduced. Existing communication systems can be used first,
even if they have not been adapted for the application, and
then future adapted data links can be added or the existing
systems can be adapted according to the requirements. We
distinguish different systems in the categories of infrastructure
communication and adhoc communication.
For most use cases, the already existing communication
infrastructure in the urban area will be sufficient, since for a
large part the exchange of information is not security-critical
and the required amounts of data can be transmitted over it
with a certain delay. Since collision avoidance is a particularly
safety-critical application in urban areas, we consider an
specifically tailored and redundant safety network based on
an ad hoc communication system to be the most important
element for this application. In this case, important information
for collision avoidance should be exchanged primarily via a
direct and adapted data link between vehicles.
We consider the construction of a combined communication
and monitoring system, which shall meet the following
characteristics.3
Fig. 2: Overview of categories that have direct or indirect mutual relationships with communication for Urban Air Mobility.
1)Cooperative Collision Avoidance
Cooperative collision avoidance based on ad hoc
communication between drones will be implemented
that creates an additional, decentralized safety net
without having to rely on communication infrastructure.
2)Redundant Monitoring and Tracking of Aircraft
Not only can ad hoc communications be used to
establish a direct link between drones, but redundant
monitoring of drone movements can be established
using appropriate ground stations to support the UTM.
This can be done using the position messages of
all drones in range, which are already broadcast for
collision avoidance.
3)Backup Datalink
For most applications, non-critical information can be
sent over existing communication infrastructure. Nev-
ertheless, it may be useful to have a redundant bi-
directional data link available for this as well to increase
reliability. Furthermore, it is not yet possible to estimate
which other possible critical applications will require a
reliable data link or low latencies in addition to collision
avoidance. Therefore, it makes sense to build a basic
backup data link that goes beyond a conventional pure
beaconing system for collision avoidance. Here it would
be possible to establish only direct links between the
airborne participants and possible ground stations or to
allow links over multiple ”hops”. A ”multihop” com-
munication across multiple participants would signifi-
cantly increase the capability of a backup data link and
create a new communication infrastructure, but implies
additional effort in implementation and overhead in the
communication itself. For example, routing algorithms
would need to be implemented to route messages to therecipient via the correct path. The challenge here lies
primarily in the rapidly changing network topology due
to the high mobility of participants and changing sig-
nal propagation conditions. Thus, an initially preferred
connection path between two nodes as part of a route
can quickly become unfavorable or even fail completely
if the communication characteristics deteriorate or the
connection is quickly disrupted by shadowing.
Figure 3 illustrates such an multi-link approach considering
mobile communication and sat-based communication as avail-
able infrastructure in urban environments.
Fig. 3: Multi-link approach as communication concept in DLR
project HorizonUAM.4
4 Adhoc Communication as Solution for Colli-
sion Avoidance in Urban Airspace
In road traffic, drivers avoid collisions with other vehicles
by using their eyes to monitor their surroundings and braking
or swerving as soon as they detect that another vehicle is on a
collision course. In today’s vehicles, optional assistance sys-
tems help the driver detect potential collisions. For example,
adaptive cruise control systems use on-board sensors such as
RADAR, LIDAR, or cameras to adjust the vehicle’s speed to
maintain a safe distance from vehicles ahead.
Beyond that, a variety of other sensors can be used to
detect collision courses in road traffic, air traffic, rail traffic,
or maritime traffic. Basically, sensors can be divided into
two types: Cooperative obstacle detection sensors and non-
cooperative obstacle detection sensors. Figure 4 provides an
overview of the different sensor types for detect-and-avoid
(DAA) systems.
Fig. 4: Overview and classification of Detect-and-Avoid sys-
tems.
Cooperative obstacles actively attract attention, for example
by emitting a signal. Non-cooperative obstacles do not call
attention to themselves. Sensors that detect non-cooperative
systems can be further divided into active and passive systems.
Active systems emit a signal and detect the reflection of
the obstacle. An example of an active system is a RADAR.
Passive systems detect obstacles by detecting unintentionally
emitted signals, such as thermal radiation. Cooperative systems
are widely used in all traffic domains to create situational
awareness among vehicles. Therefore, every vehicle is required
to periodically transmit its own position and intent to nearby
vehicles via an ad-hoc communications system. Popular sys-
tems are 1090 Extended Squitter for air traffic, IEEE 802.11p
for road traffic, RCAS for rail traffic and AIS for maritime
traffic.
The main advantage of cooperative systems is the fact that
cooperative systems typically provide very accurate informa-
tion about position, direction, and speed, as well as addi-
tional information that non-cooperative systems cannot easily
provide, such as the type of target and its state. Moreover,ad-hoc communication is a way of transmitting data without
relying on any fixed infrastructure. It has several advantages
for collision avoidance, especially in critical situations where
every millisecond counts. Ad-hoc communication can achieve
lower latency than infrastructure communication, which means
that the data can be delivered faster and more reliably. Ad-hoc
communication can also serve as a backup in case the infras-
tructure communication fails or is not available. Compared to
RADAR and LIDAR, ad-hoc communication can cover higher
ranges and works even in case of signal shadowing, which is
when the signal is blocked or weakened by objects or weather
conditions. Furthermore, ad-hoc communication can enable
extended information exchange between the communicating
vehicles, such as evasion instructions and information about
trajectories. This can help to coordinate the actions and avoid
conflicts. Finally, ad-hoc communication can have lower power
consumption than RADAR, which means that it can save
energy and reduce costs.
Cooperative detect and avoid via ad-hoc communication
systems has also some disadvantages. First, the information
that is transmitted must be trusted, since there is no guarantee
that it is accurate or authentic. Therefore, security measures are
needed to ensure the reliability and integrity of the communi-
cation. Second, ad-hoc communication requires an additional
communication module, which adds costs, weight and power
consumption to the vehicles or participants. This may affect
their performance and efficiency. However, safety should not
be compromised for the sake of saving resources. Third, ad-
hoc communication can only detect uncooperative participants,
who do not share their information or intentions with others.
This means that there may be some hidden or unexpected
threats that are not accounted for by the communication.
5 Development of a Drone-to-Drone Channel
Model for Urban Environments based on
Measurements
In 2019, German Aerospace Center (DLR) conducted a
wideband channel sounding measurement campaign with
two small hexacopters to measure drone-to-drone (D2D)
propagation characteristics in an urban environment. The
campaign took place at the DLR site in Oberpfaffenhofen,
Germany, in three different environments with different
flight trajectories including critical scenarios, where two
communicating drones are not always in LOS to each
other and are on a collision course. A channel sounding
signal was transmitted in the C-band at 5.2 GHz with a
bandwidth of 100 MHz and a transmit power of 30 dBm
using omnidirectional and vertically polarized radiating
antennas mounted underneath the drones. The measurement
setup, hardware equipment and flight scenarios are described
in detail in [12], [13].
Based on these measurements, we proposed a wideband
channel model for D2D scenarios in urban environments in
[14] to help evaluating and validating different communica-
tion concepts and datalink candidates via simulations without5
having the need to perform complex and time costly mea-
surement campaigns. By considering the underlying signal
propagation effects in urban environments the robustness of
datalink candidates can be improved. The model follows a
geometrical-statistical channel modeling (GSCM) approach
and incorporates coarse-grained knowledge about realistic
locations and shapes for buildings to model the propagation
effects closely to their physical cause in real-world. It is
antenna independent and considers the identified dominant
signal propagation effects from our measurements, but can
easily incorporate further statistics. A more detailed discussion
on the propagation characteristics and preliminary steps are
presented in [15] and [16]. Figure 5 gives an overview of the
model elements and fig. 6 shows the steps in the simulation
chain.
Fig. 5: Overview of elements for the D2D channel model.
First, coarse-grained abstract building shapes are placed
according to the scenario under investigation. The locations
and shapes of buildings in the surrounding environment very
much influence the propagation characteristics of the urban
D2D channel and therefore this initial placement helps to
achieve realistic distribution of all other model elements. For
this, statistical descriptions for urban environments like in
the ITU-R Rec. P.1410 model [17] for example or direct 3D
geometries from land surveying offices or similar can be used.
Fig. 6: Overview of the simulation chain for the D2D channel
model.
After the definition of the building shapes, the flight trajec-
tories are defined and the properties of two different elements
are drawn from statistical distributions. There are point scat-
terers with certain opening angles and scattering losses placed
at different positions on the surfaces as well as reflection
surfaces with certain dimensions and reflection losses. After
this initialization phase the scenario is fully defined and the
communication channel properties are generated in a snap-
shot based manner given the targeted time resolution. Then
different propagation effects are calculated for the simplified
resulting signal paths for all elements. Finally, the super-
imposed signal is calculated at the receiver.
6 Development of DroneCAST
As an essential part of the described multi-link approach
in sec.3, we aim to develop a data link tailored to the
special requirements and challenges for the safe operation of
UA Vs in urban areas. As a redundant data link based on the
direct exchange between the vehicles, this supplements the
communication alongside the available communication infras-
tructure such as through mobile or sat communication. The
concept for this ad hoc communication first takes into account
the requirements imposed by the main application, collision
avoidance, since this is the most safety-critical application and
the exchange of information is given priority. But we expect
following three different applications within UAM that will
have rely on communication to airspace participants over the
radio and are safety-critical to ensure a safe operation. First,6
cooperative collision avoidance based on direct communica-
tions will be needed resolve potential conflicts in the last
course of action like shown in fig. 8a. In order to ensure
the high requirements for navigation such as high position
accuracy and high availability, the navigation concept will
also rely on redundant design of onboard sensors such as
GNSS, IMU or cameras and the fusion of these sensor data.
In addition to his, broadcasting GNSS correction data from
ground based augmentation system (GBAS) groundstations
to airborne vehicles may support their navigation. For this,
information must be transmitted from the ground stations to
the drones like shown in fig. 8b. As third possible application,
broadcasting important infos from vertiports to all vehicles in
close distance such as in emergency cases for example might
be needed like illustrated in fig 8c.
For this we proposed Drone Communication and Suriveil-
lance Technology (DroneCAST) [18] in order to establish an
additional, decentralized and robust safety layer for the UTM
concept as third level of the general levels like shown in
fig. 7. We discussed first design decisions as well as analyzed
requirements for DroneCAST. It is supposed to work reliably
up to a drone density of 100 drones per square kilometer
while using not more than 5 MHz of frequency bandwidth
in the C-band at between 5030 MHz to 5091 MHz, which is
already foreseen for drone communications. Major identified
challenges are the severe multipath propagation environment
and sudden shadowing events from a physical layer point-of-
view and the high expected drone densities as well as limited
communication resources from a medium access control point-
of-view.
Fig. 7: Three general levels of deconfliction.
(a) Collision Avoidance
(b) GBAS Transmitter
(c) Vertiport Communication
Fig. 8: Expected safety-critical applications for urban air
mobility relying on communications over radio interface.7
7 Experimental Platform and Flightdemonstra-
tions towards DroneCAST
As a first step towards an implementation of DroneCAST,
we equipped two drones with hardware prototypes of the
experimental communication system and performed several
flights around the model city to evaluate the performance
of the hardware in comparison to commercially-off-the-shelf
(COTS) hardware and to demonstrate different applications
that will rely on robust and efficient communications. The
flight tests are to show if the hardware is suitable for a later
implementation and can be flown by our drones.
7.1 Experimental Radio
The basis hardware for our experimental radio is a
Software Defined Radio (SDR) together with a software
implementation of the IEEE 802.11p WiFi standard for
vehicular communication [7] on an small companion
computer. The software implementation, which consists of
different building blocks for a transmission system, runs
in GNU radio, a signal processing framework, and was
developed as an open source stack in [19]. In order increase
the transmitted signal power of the SDR we added an signal
amplifier and for time synchronization we are using a GPS
disciplined oscillator that can be accessed by the SDR.
Following list gives an overview of the hardware elements
of the experimental radio.
•Software Defined Radio: Ettus USRP B210
•Companion Computer: Intel NUC (Ubuntu 20.04.6
LTS, GNU Radio)
•Amplifier: Coaxial ZX60-83LN 21 dB gain
•Time Synchronization: Board Mounted GPSDO
(TCXO)
•Power Supply: 100 W DC Converter for 19V , 100 W
DC Converter for 6V
The elements are also illustrated in the payload setup shown
in fig. 10.
The GNU radio implementation uses a TAP interface, which
is a virtual Ethernet device, on the companion computer and
it enables to use the SDR as an IP based data link device.
Thus, the experimental radio is able to transmit different
application data via IP interface. As first modifications to-
wards DroneCAST we also changed the center frequency to
5050 MHz, which is within the foreseen frequency band of
5030 MHz to 5091 MHz and halved the bandwidth from
10 MHz to 5 MHz and tested the modifications.
We first evaluated the performance of our setup under ideal
laboratory conditions by connecting two experimental radios
with defined attenuators. Thereby we transmitted 25·103
packets of 125 Byte payload data with a transmission rate
of 10 Hz for different attenuation values with and without
amplifying the signal. Without amplification the USRP B210
is able to transmit with up to 10 dBm. With the amplifier we
set the resulting transmission power to about 23 dBm in order
to achieve similar transmission power as for the COTS radio, a
Cohda Wireless Mk5. The amplifier has a gain of 21 dB, which
means the same settings on the SDR result in a transmissionpower about 2 dBm. We repeated the measurement with and
without the amplifier in order to evaluate if the amplifier causes
signal distortions which would lead to increased packet errors.
Figure 9 shows the resulting packet error rates over different
attenuation values. Furthermore, it shows the Signal to Noise
Ratio (SNR) values at packet reception indicated by the SDR.
These values help us to evaluate the in-flight measurement
results described in section 7.3.
Fig. 9: Measured packet error rates and received SNR values
under ideal lab conditions without and without signal ampli-
fication.
We can clearly see, that the two measurements with and
without amplifier only differ according to the gain of 21 dB.
Therefore, we assume a low-distortion amplification and the
amplifier is feasible for our setup. Furthermore, the measure-
ments reveal that the radios are only able to receive packets
in a certain SNR range. For attenuation of 110 dB and 90 dB
respectively the received signal power is too low and starting
with 90 dB and 70 dB respectively the signal power starts to
overdrive the radio until no packet can be decoded any more.
The dynamic range is relatively small, because there is no
active automatic gain control (AGC). The hardware offers a
built-in AGC, but the hardware driver does not active it when
using the GNU radio framework.
7.2 Integrated Payload on Hexacopter and Flighttrial
Setup
We integrated our experimental radio as payload on our
hexacopters. We are using two custom build hexacopters8
based on DJI S900 airframes with upgraded E1200 propulsion
system. They are equipped with two 10 Ah batteries at nominal
voltage of 22.2 V and are able to carry up to 3 kg of
payload with a flight time of approximately 15 to 20 minutes.
Furthermore, they are using a Pixhawk 2 flight controller
and have Raspberry Pi 4 companion computers in order to
communicate with the flight controller via MA VLink messages
over a serial interface. Figure 10 shows the main elements
of our flight trial setup used for all in-flight measurements.
Thereby we switched between the experimental radio and the
COTS radio, but we were also able to carry both payloads for
the flight demonstrations.
Fig. 10: Overview of elements for integrated paylaod on
drones.
This setup enables the transmission of flight controller data
over the radios for different applications and also to send
commands to the flight controller.
7.3 In-flight Measurements
We equipped our two hexacopters with the given hardware
prototypes for collecting in-flight measurement data in and
around the model city. In order to asses the experimental
radio, we first performed three different flight missions and
compared the performance between the experimental radio and
the COTS hardware. Then we measured the performance when
flying close and in between the model city providing nonLOS
scenarios. Figure 11 illustrates the overall flight trial setup for
the measurements consisting of our two hexacopters equipped
with one of the two payload options.
The measurements and results are discussed in the follow-
ing sections. Overall the measurements and demonstrations
showed a feasible bidirectional information exchange for the
experimental radio setup. We increased the transmission power
by using an signal amplifier in order to achieve similar
transmission power compared to the COTS radio and we used
additional GPSDO extension boards in order to synchronize all
the radios with GPS time reference. However, the performance
of our experimental radio was slightly worse to the COTShardware due to a missing AGC and weaker SNR values. In
all line of sight (LOS) measurement scenarios, no packet losses
occurred for the COTS radio whereas the experimental radio
showed packet errors between 4%−8%.
Fig. 11: Overview of flight trial setup for the in-flight mea-
surements.
7.3.1 Flight Mission 1
For Mission 1 the transmitting drone was hovering at a
defined height of 15 m and the receiving drone was flying
four circles with a radius of 30 m around the hovering drone
in three different heights at 10 m, 15 m and 20 m. Figure 12
illustrates the flight mission and figure 13 shows the flight
heights as well as the distances between the drones as direct
three-dimensional distance and as two-dimensional distance
above the ground. The flying drone always headed towards
the next mission waypoint indicated as dots in the figure.
Due to navigation accuracy, the flown trajectories were not
always the same but closely followed the path given the
waypoints for all measurement scenarios. In this scenario, the
distance between the drones stays more or less the same and
only slightly changes with the drone heights. Therefore, this
scenario enables to analyze the impact of air frame shadowing
without changing the fading due to multipath propagation.
7.3.2 Results Mission 1
Figure 14 shows the measured received SNR values of the
experimental radio for the whole flight and the instants in time
when packets where not successfully received together with
the distances. It can be seen that mostly packet errors occur
at low SNR values and the SNR values reveal a repeating
pattern and vary between values lower than 10 dB and higher
than 30 dB. Figure 15 shows again the received SNR value
and the packet errors overlay-ed on the trajectories in two and
three dimensional layouts. On the map we can clearly see that
the repeating pattern of the SNR values results from different
height independent viewing angles between the drones and are
caused by the airframe shadowing of the hovering drone. The
overall packet error rate for this measurement was about 4%
and the main reason was a too weak achieved SNR value for
the experimental radio.
For comparison to the experimental radio we performed
this measurement for the COTS hardware. Figure 16 shows
the received SNR values and the distances, but this time no
packet errors have occurred. The repeating pattern is again
recognizable and the indicated values are higher compared to
the values of the experimental radio but the differences are
similar. This result shows, that the COTS radio can achieve
higher SNR values for the same received signal powers.9
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 12: Mission 1: Waypoint mission points and flight trajec-
tories for transmitting (TX) and receiving (RX) drone.
Fig. 13: Mission 1: Heights of drones and distances between
them.
Fig. 14: Mission 1: Measurement results for experimental radio
setup.
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 15: Mission 1: Measurement results overlay-ed on map
for experimental radio setup.10
Figure 17 illustrates the results again on a map. We again
Fig. 16: Mission 1: Measurement results for COTS hardware
setup.
can clearly see the influence of the airframe shadowing.
7.3.3 Flight Mission 2
For Mission 2 the receiving drone flew the same flight
trajectory as in Mission 1, but the transmitting drone was
hovering at a different position outside the circles. In this
scenario, the distance between the drones changes in order
to analyze the influence of fading in comparison to the results
of Mission 1. Figure 18 illustrates the mission plotted on a
map and fig. 19 shows the drones heights and the distances
between them.
7.3.4 Results Mission 2
Figure 20 shows the measured received SNR values of the
experimental radio for the whole flight and the instants in time
when packets where not successfully received together with
the distances. It can be seen that mostly packet errors occur
at low SNR values and the SNR values reveal a repeating
pattern and vary between values lower than 10 dB and higher
than 30 dB. Figure 21 shows again the received SNR value
and the packet errors overlay-ed on the trajectories in two and
three dimensional layouts. On the map we can clearly see that
the repeating pattern of the SNR values results from different
height independent viewing angles between the drones and are
caused by airframe shadowing but this time of the hovering
drone and the flying drone. In comparison to Mission 1,
slightly more packet errors occur. The overall packet error
rate for this measurement was about 8%and the main reason
was a too weak achieved SNR value for the experimental radio
caused by airframe shadowing.
For comparison to the experimental radio we performed this
measurement for the COTS hardware. Figure 22 shows the
received SNR values and the distances, but no packet errors
have occurred. The repeating pattern is again recognizable and
the indicated values are higher compared to the values of the
experimental radio but the differences are similar. Figure 23
illustrates the results again on a map. We again can clearly
see the influence of the airframe shadowing.
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 17: Mission 1: Measurement results on map for COTS
hardware setup.
7.3.5 Flight Mission 3
For Mission 3 both drones were flying at heights about 20 m
above ground on parallel trajectories and were repeatingly
coming close down to about 10 m distance and flying away
from each other to about 60 m distance. For this scenario
the viewing angles only changed when flying forwards or
backwards the trajectory in order to analyze the influences
of fading and distance without airframe shadowing.
7.3.6 Results Mission 3
Figure 26 shows the measured received SNR values of the
experimental radio for the whole flight and the instants in time
when packets where not successfully received together with
the distances. This time we can see packet errors additionally
due to high SNR values when the receiver was not able to
handle the high signal power. Figure 27 shows again the
received SNR values and the packet errors overlay-ed on the
trajectories in two and three dimensional layouts. On the map
we can clearly see that the repeating pattern of the SNR values
mostly results from the distances between the drones. When11
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 18: Mission 2: Waypoint mission points and flight trajec-
tories for transmitting and receiving drone.
Fig. 19: Mission 2: Heights of drones and distances between.
they come close to each other at half of the mission path then
Fig. 20: Mission 2: Measurement results for SDR setup.
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 21: Mission 2: Measurement results on map for SDR
setup.
the received signal power gets too high due to low distance12
Fig. 22: Mission 2: Measurement results for COTS hardware
setup.
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 23: Mission 2: Measurement results on map for COTS
hardware setup.
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 24: Mission 3: Waypoint mission points and flight trajec-
tories for transmitting and receiving drone.
Fig. 25: Mission 3: Heights of drones and distances between.
and when they are at furthest distance away from each other,13
Fig. 26: Mission 3: Measurement results for SDR setup.
the received signal power gets too low. The overall packet
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 27: Mission 3: Measurement results on map for SDR
setup.error rate for this measurement was about 6%.
For comparison to the experimental radio we performed this
measurement for the COTS hardware. Figure 28 shows the
received SNR values and the distances, but no packet errors
have occurred. The repeating pattern is again recognizable and
the indicated values are higher compared to the values of the
experimental radio but the differences are similar. Figure 29
Fig. 28: Mission 3: Measurement results for COTS hardware
setup.
illustrates the results again on a map. We again can clearly
see the influence of the airframe shadowing.
7.4 Flight Demonstrations at Model City
In addition to our measurements, we also demonstrated
following different drone-to-drone and drone-to-infrastructure
communications around the model city
•Secured Transmission of differential ground augmenta-
tion data (GBAS) with broadcast authentication protocol
TESLA [20]
•Transmission of the drone’s live position and monitoring
on a ground station
•Cooperative collision avoidance by broadcasting flight
trajectories and automatically stopping the drones to hold
position
For this we used the overall setup shown in fig. 30. For the
collision avoidance scenario we used our experimental radio
for the D2D communication and transmitted monitoring mes-
sages down to a ground station via the COTS radio. In order
to exchange trajectory information and to send commands to
the flight controllers in order to stop their flight missions in
case of emergent collision, we executed a python script on
the raspberry pi companion computers on the drones and used
the pymavlink library in order to communicate with the flight
controller via MA VLink.14
(a) 2D
(b) 3D
Fig. 29: Mission 3: Measurement results on map for COTS
hardware setup.
Fig. 30: Overview of major elements of flight trial setup.Figure. 31 shows a video screenshot of the collision avoid-
ance scenario demonstrated with our experimental setup at the
model city. Thereby it shows the Live Monitoring screen with
the received trajectories of both drones at a time when the
collision avoidance application stopped the drones flight and
sent an emergency message down to the monitoring ground
station.
Fig. 31: Flight demonstration of collision avoidance with
experimental setup at model city.
For the GBAS transmission for the drones we used one
drone as broadcasting station at the ground like shown in
fig. 32 and let one drone fly in and around the model city.
In order to secure the transmission we used an software
implementation of the TESLA protocol that was already
demonstrated in our group at a flight trial with a piloted aircraft
to secure the broadcast of GBAS correction data via LDACS
[21].
Fig. 32: Flight demonstration of secured GBAS transmission
to drone around model city.
8 Conclusion and Outlook
In this work, we presented a multi-link approach with a
focus on an ad-hoc communication concept that will help to
reduce the probability of mid-air collisions and thus increase
social acceptance of urban air mobility. As an essential part15
of the described multi-link approach, we aim to develop
DroneCAST, a data link tailored to the special requirements
and challenges in urban airspace, in order to establish an
additional, decentralized and robust safety layer for the UTM
concept. For the development of DroneCAST, we make use of
our Drone-to-Drone Channel Model for Urban Environments,
which is based on measurements in order to increase the
robustness and efficiency. As a first step towards an implemen-
tation, we equipped two drones with hardware prototypes of
an experimental communication system and performed several
flights around a model city to evaluate the performance of the
hardware and to demonstrate different applications that will
rely on robust and efficient communications. Results showed
the feasibility of the experimental hardware setup. However,
a missing automatic gain control for this setup resulted in a
weaker performance compared to a COTS radio. Therefore,
in the next steps we aim to develop a next level hardware
prototype for a DroneCAST radio and also will target physical
layer robustness and security topics.
References
[1] SESAR Joint Undertaking, “U-space blueprint,” 2017.
[2] FAA/NASA, “UTM Concept of Operations V2,” Mar. 2020.
[3] D. Geister, “DLR U-Space Blueprint,” p. 26, 2017.
[4] RTCA, “DO-260B - Minimum Operational Performance Standards for
1090 MHz Extended Squitter Automatic Dependent Surveillance -
Broadcast (ADS-B) and Traffic Information Services - Broadcast (TIS-
B),“,” 2009.
[5] RTCA, “DO-282B with Corrigendum 1 - Minimum Operational Perfor-
mance Standards for Univer-sal Access Transceiver (UAT) Automatic
Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast,“,” 2011.
[6] ITU, “Technical characteristics for an automatic identification system
using timedivision multiple access in the VHF maritime mobile band,
Recommendation ITU-R M.1371-4,” 2014.
[7]802.11p-2010 - IEEE Standard for Information Technology– Local
and Metropolitan Area Networks– Specific Requirements– Part 11:
Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
Specifications Amendment 6: Wireless Access in Vehicular Env. Place
of publication not identified: IEEE, 2010.
[8] B. Van Der Bergh, A. Chiumento, and S. Pollin, “LTE in the sky: Trading
off propagation benefits with interference costs for aerial nodes,” IEEE
Communications Magazine , vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 44–50, May 2016.
[9] I. Z. Kovacs, “DroC2om - 763601 - D4.3 Integrated cellular-satellite
inter-system design solutions for high reliability UAS data links,” p. 68,
2019.
[10] Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institut, “SUCOM - Superior UTM Commu-
nication System, https://sucom.tech/,” 2022.
[11] J. C. Dauer, Ed., Automated Low-Altitude Air Delivery: Towards Au-
tonomous Cargo Transportation with Drones , ser. Research Topics in
Aerospace. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022.
[12] D. Becker and L. Schalk, “Enabling Air-to-Air Wideband Channel
Measurements between Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles with Optical
Fibers,” in 2019 IEEE/AIAA 38th Digital Avionics Systems Conference
(DASC) . San Diego, CA, USA: IEEE, Sep. 2019, pp. 1–7.
[13] D. Becker, U.-C. Fiebig, and L. Schalk, “Wideband Channel Measure-
ments and First Findings for Low Altitude Drone-to-Drone Links in an
Urban Scenario,” in 2020 14th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (EuCAP) . Copenhagen, Denmark: IEEE, Mar. 2020, pp.
1–5.
[14] D. Becker, U.-C. Fiebig, and L. M. Schalk, “Modeling the Drone-to-
Drone Communications Channel for Urban Environments,” in 2023 17th
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP) , Firenze,
Italy, 2023.
[15] D. Becker, U.-C. Fiebig, and L. M. Schalk, “Drone-to-drone propagation
characteristics in urban safety-critical scenarios,” in 2022 IEEE Confer-
ence on Antenna Measurements and Applications (CAMA) . Guangzhou,
China: IEEE, Dec. 2022, pp. 1–6.[16] D. Becker and U.-C. Fiebig, “Measurement Based Identification of
MPCs in an Urban Drone-To-Drone Propagation Scenario,” in 2022 16th
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP) , Madrid,
2022.
[17] ITU, “RECOMMENDATION ITU-R P.1410-5 - Propagation data and
prediction methods required for the design of terrestrial broadband radio
access systems operating in a frequency range from 3 to 60 GHz,” p. 34,
2012.
[18] L. M. Schalk and D. Becker, “DroneCAST – Analysis of Requirements
and Discussion of First Design Decisions,” in 2022 IEEE/AIAA 41st
Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC) . Portsmouth, V A, USA:
IEEE, Sep. 2022, pp. 1–9.
[19] B. Bloessl, M. Segata, C. Sommer, and F. Dressler, “Towards an Open
Source IEEE 802.11p stack: A full SDR-based transceiver in GNU
Radio,” in 2013 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference . Boston, MA,
USA: IEEE, Dec. 2013, pp. 143–149.
[20] A. Perrig, R. Canetti, J. D. Tygar, and D. Song, “The TESLA Broadcast
Authentication Protocol,” p. 11, 2003.
[21] N. Maurer, T. Graupl, M. A. Bellido-Manganell, D. M. Mielke, A. Filip-
Dhaubhadel, O. Heirich, D. Gerbeth, M. Felux, L. M. Schalk, D. Becker,
N. Schneckenburger, and M. Schnell, “Flight Trial Demonstration of
Secure GBAS via the L-band Digital Aeronautical Communications
System (LDACS),” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine ,
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 8–17, Apr. 2021.