Benchmarking in civil aviation:
some empirical evidence
Jackie Fry
Accounting and Finance Research Unit, Open University Business School,
Milton Keynes, UK
Ian Humphreys
Department of Civil and Building Engineering, Loughborough University,
Loughborough, Loughborough, UK
Graham Francis
Department of Accounting, Waikato Management School, Waikato University,
Hamilton, New Zealand
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to explore the use of best practice benchmarking in civil aviation.
Design/methodology/approach – Evidence was gathered from two international questionnaire
surveys of the top 200 airlines and the top 200 airports. Supplementary evidence included interviewswith airline and airport managers.
Findings – The proﬁle of responses was a good match to the samples. Benchmarking was identiﬁed
as the most used performance improvement technique for both airlines and airports. Larger airlines
were more likely to engage in benchmarking. Ease of usage and the cost relative to other performanceimprovement techniques were important factors in determining benchmarking uptake. Problems ofdata comparability and competitive sensitivity were raised. Airports had a greater tendency toconcentrate on benchmarking with similar organisations and placed a relatively greater emphasis onits use for performance measurement over process improvement.
Research limitations/implications – Further research should include a sample of detailed case
studies to investigate exactly how different airlines and airports are using benchmarking.
Practical implications – Performance measurement has become increasingly important in aviation
as markets become more competitive and the number of asymmetric shocks seems to increase.
Originality/value – The surveys revealed a very high utilisation of benchmarking, although a range
of activities were actually being undertaken under the banner of benchmarking. The high uptake ofbenchmarking is probably due, to the turbulent nature of civil aviation that has placed signiﬁcanteconomic pressures on managers.
Keywords Airlines, Airports, Benchmarking
Paper type Research paper
Introduction
Airlines and airports face challenging, dynamic market environments that in the short
term are extremely sensitive to the world economic and political situation. Long-term
growth of around 4.5 per cent per annum in air trafﬁc has been forecast (AirportsCouncil International, 2003), but events such as September 11, the recent SARSThe Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister www.emeraldinsight.com/1463-5771.htm
The authors wish to thank all those who took part in this survey, Dr Jacky Holloway, Open
University Business School and Dr Robert Caves, Transport Studies Group, Loughborough
University.Benchmarking in
civil aviation
125
Benchmarking: An International
Journal
Vol. 12 No. 2, 2005
pp. 125-137
qEmerald Group Publishing Limited
1463-5771
DOI 10.1108/14635770510593077outbreak and poor economic conditions have seen an overall stagnation and reduction
of trafﬁc during the period 2001 to 2003 although some market sectors have performedbetter. Historically airlines have made very low margins, 8 per cent on average. The
pressure from competition, deregulated market forces and, in certain regions the
challenge from low cost airlines, has presented management with the problem of howto improve airline economic performance. Airports have traditionally made muchbetter returns than their airline business partners. Lack of direct competition, morestable and diversiﬁed income streams and public ﬁnancing and ownership have
contributed to their superior ﬁnancial performance in the past. The introduction and
success of retail and commercial non-aviation related business has continued to driveﬁnancial performance today. In general, airport management has moved from beingfocussed on operations under public ownership to an era where the management goalis to deliver a return on capital invested for shareholders, many of which are nowprivate companies. The pressure on airport management to deliver improved
performance across a diverse range of activities has increased over time in line with
airports now being viewed largely as facilities that should be ﬁnancially self sufﬁcient.
This paper seeks to identify the nature and prevalence of benchmarking activity in
civil aviation. It utilises primary source material from two international surveys ofairlines and airports supplemented by interviews with airline and airport managers, toprovide a picture of the current utilisation of benchmarking activities in civil aviation.
The structure of this paper is as follows. The next section describes the research
methods used. This is followed by a review of the prevalence of benchmarking in civilaviation compared to other performance management techniques. The ﬁnal twosections of the paper look at benchmarking by airlines and airports respectively.
Research methods
The set of airlines sampled was the top 200 airlines as ranked by, in terms of passenger
kilometres performed, Air Transport World in terms of total passengers for 2001 ( Air
Transport World , 2002). The top 200 were chosen because it represented the major
players in the industry who account for over 75 per cent of airline passenger kilometresperformed. At the start of the survey, 12 airlines listed in the top 200 were no longeroperating and therefore were deleted from the list. The next 12 airlines still in operation
were added to make the sample up to 200. The set of airports sampled was the top 200
as ranked by ACI in terms of total passengers for 1999 (Airports Council International,2000). The top 200 was viewed as an appropriate sample because these airports haveapproximately 3 million passengers or more per annum. There are signiﬁcanteconomies of scale at this size (Doganis, 1992; Graham, 2001).
For both surveys, each questionnaire sent out was given a unique identiﬁcation
number to ensure repeat mailings were only sent to non-respondents. A copy of the
questionnaire and a covering letter were sent out to airlines on 10 February, 17 March,28 May and 27 August 2003 and to airports on the 15 August, 26 September and 7November 2000. A total of 200 were sent out in the ﬁrst mailing for both surveys. Forairlines, two remained undeliverable and during the survey period a further twoairlines ceased operations. Of the remaining 196 questionnaires, two airlines declined
to participate and 43 were returned completed, a response rate of 23 per cent. For
airports, ﬁve remained undeliverable. Of the remaining 195, four airports declined toparticipate and 58 were returned completed, representing a response rate of 32 per cent.BIJ
12,2
126Information provided by a number of major airlines and some major airports was on
the strict condition that they remained anonymous. Therefore no individuals or
organisations are identiﬁed in this paper. The quotes reproduced in this paper wereprovided in answer to open ended questions in the survey instruments[1].
Demographics and non-response bias
The respondent airlines and the airlines in the sample were classiﬁed into geographic
regions using the categories as deﬁned in Air Transport World (2002): Africa/Middle
East, Asia/Paciﬁc, Europe, Latin America/Caribbean and North America[2] (Table I).
The proﬁle of the respondents was then compared to the proﬁles of the overall samples.
In order to perform a chi-square test, the categories of Latin America/Caribbean, andAfrica/Middle East were combined into a “rest of world” category for airlines and Latin
America/Caribbean, Asia/Paciﬁc and Africa/Middle East for airports so that the
expected values of the categories were greater than 5. The chi-square tests showed that
the proﬁles of respondent airlines and airports were not signiﬁcantly different to the
proﬁle of the samples at the 5 per cent level (airlines: x
2¼4:02, ns; airports: x2¼4:90,
ns). However it should be noted that the actual probability for airports was 0.09. It can
be seen from Table I that North American airports are proportionally over represented
and the rest of the world under represented. This high response rate by airports in
North America may be a consequence of the strong public utility ethos at North
American airports with respect to public information provision. Overall the geographicspread of the respondents is a good match to the geographic spread of both of the
samples.
The representativeness of the respondents can also be conﬁrmed by examining the
proﬁles of the total number of passengers handled per annum by the sample airlines
and airports and the respondents (Table II). Chi-square tests showed that the proﬁles of
respondent airlines and airports were not signiﬁcantly different to the proﬁle of the
samples at the 5 per cent level (airlines: x
2¼2:19, ns; airports: x2¼1:14, ns). The
range of number of passengers handled per annum by the respondents is a very good
match to that of the samples.
Benchmarking in the context of other performance improvement
techniques
The questionnaire instruments included a question aimed at identifying the relative
usage made of performance improvement techniques (see Table III).
RegionPercentage of
sample airlines
(n¼196)Percentage of
respondent airlines
(n¼43)Percentage of
sample airports
(n¼195)Percentage of
respondent
airports ( n¼58)
Europe 37 52 40 38
North America 21 16 34 48Asia/Paciﬁc 23 16 17 10LatinAmerica/Caribbean 11 7 6 2Africa/Middle East 8 9 3 2Table I.
Geographic proﬁle of the
respondents and the
samplesBenchmarking in
civil aviation
127It is noteworthy in the context of this paper that benchmarking was identiﬁed as the
most used performance improvement technique for both airlines and airports. The
evidence of benchmarking activity revealed in the two industries will be further
considered in separate sections. Although the two businesses are inter-related, they are
very different, so that direct comparisons between the two industries should not be
made. However it is interesting to recognise that these distinctly different industries
both use benchmarking to improve business performance more so than alternative
performance techniques.
The use of benchmarking by airlines
Airline management has long recognised the importance of comparing airline
performance both within the airline and in relation to the performance of other airlines.Cost data comparisons from published sources by organisations such as the
International Air Transport Association (IATA), the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), the UK Civil Aviation Authority and periodicals such as Air
Transport World and Aircraft Economics are available for use by management to
assess comparative performance and as a starting point for exploring the reasons
behind the performance differences. Some of these differences can be explained by
geographical variation in labour and other input costs. In addition to published
statistics a number of reports providing “benchmark” statistics and comparisons of
Passengers
handled/millionPercentage of
sample airlines
(n¼196)Percentage of
respondent airlines
(n¼43)Percentage of
sample airports
(n¼195)Percentage of
respondent airports
(n¼58)
1t o4a61 51 30 29
5 to 9 22 26 29 2410 to 19 8 9 19 2320 and above 9 14 22 24
Note:
aOnly includes up to the 200th largest airline and 200th busiest airportTable II.
Number of passengershandled per annum bythe respondents and thesamples
TechniquePercentage use
by airlinesa
(n¼41)Percentage use
by airportsa
(n¼56)
Benchmarking 88 72
Quality management systems(e.g. ISO9000/BS5750 or similar) 54 23Balanced scorecard 44 25Activity based costing 34 36Business process reengineering 39 23Total quality management (TQM) 22 41Environmental management systems (e.g. ISO14000) 17 27Value based management 15 9Business excellence model/EFQM 7 12
Note:
aRespondents could use more than one methodTable III.
Performanceimprovement techniquesused by respondentsBIJ
12,2
128airline performance have emerged in recent years (Mason et al. , 2000; Morrell et al. ,
2000; Transport Research Laboratory, 2002a). Quality of service indicators arecollected by airlines internally and by International Air Transport Association’sannual world passenger survey which monitors customer satisfaction with 29 aspectsof airline service (IATA, 2002). Each airline can compare itself with the ratings for therest of the sample to provide a measure of relative performance.
Although the literature identiﬁes a range of data collection methods and a
comparison of key performance indicators, the nature and prevalence of benchmarkingactivities more oriented towards process improvement within the sector have notpreviously been identiﬁed in a systematic way. The question of what formalmechanisms exist for benchmarking has largely remained a mystery. A primemotivation of this study therefore is to address this gap in understanding.
As illustrated in Table III, the level of benchmarking activity across the airline
sector was high and more than conﬁrmed the prior expectations of benchmarkingprevalence. Table IV shows that international airlines from Europe, North Americaand Asia/Paciﬁc demonstrated a higher propensity to benchmark, with Europeshowing the highest propensity. These three regions are also the strongest performingregions in terms of world airline trafﬁc.
In terms of airline size, larger airlines were more likely to engage in some form of
benchmarking activity than smaller airlines (see Table V). Benchmarking was found tobe a given part of airline management activity at all airlines handling ten millionpassengers or more that responded to the survey. This is consistent with the ﬁndingsof Holloway et al. (1999) who found that larger organisations were more likely to
benchmark than smaller ones. This said, the prevalence of benchmarking activity isstill high among the airlines handling between one and nine million passengers perannum. During interviews, comments from airline management revealed that“benchmarking is a very good tool for improvement”. Evidence collected suggested the
Region Percentage benchmarking ( n¼41)
Europe 95
North America 86Asia/Paciﬁc 86Latin America/Caribbean 67Africa/Middle East 67Overall weighted average 88Table IV.
Prevalence of airline
benchmarking by region
Passengers handled/million Percentage benchmarking ( n¼39)
1t o4 8 0
5t o9 9 110 to 19 10020 and above 100Overall weighted average 88Table V.
Benchmarking in relation
to airline sizeBenchmarking in
civil aviation
129ease of usage and the cost relative to other performance improvement techniques were
also important factors in determining its uptake.
Airline alliances were found to provide useful frameworks for benchmarking
activity with the survey discovering that 49 per cent of airlines undertookbenchmarking with alliance partners. Given the trend towards globalisation of theindustry, benchmarking with alliance partners is a further means beyond theestablished commercial agreements of leveraging management beneﬁts from alliancesand creates a natural opportunity for benchmarking activity that ought to be less prone
to data sensitivity and conﬁdentiality issues.
The pressure for improved performance and the dynamic nature of airline
management with respect to looking for new ways to measure airline performance isperhaps reﬂected by the surveys ﬁnding that 62 per cent of the airlines that respondedto the survey had introduced new performance measures within the last two years.
The questionnaire instrument included the opportunity for resp ondents to describe
their benchmarking experiences. Most comme nts were positive such as “it is good to check
how we are doing and to identify industry trends” and “useful as a driver for creating asense of urgency”. However althou gh generally favourable, not a ll airlines reported equally
favourable experiences. One respondent descr ibing the outcomes as “unremarkable” and
another commented that benchmarking was “difﬁcult due to availability of data.”
There is a tendency for airlines to look within the industry for benchmarking
partners (see Table VI) as opposed to benchmarking and learning from organisationsthat have similar processes but are part of non-air transport related organisations. “Itwas good experience, letting us position our company towards the other airlines” Thevalue of comparison with similar organisations and the difﬁculties associated withobtaining certain commercially sensitive data was highlighted by a number ofmanagers. One stated that benchmarking was:
Very useful even if, for commercial reasons, the exchange of information is limited and slow
with competitors. Other airlines are very easy to approach and good at sharing process, and
technology applications, experience. Naturally large culture and environment (and resistance
sometimes) issues can make adaptation or replication difﬁcult.
The problem of data comparability for benchmarking between airlines was
highlighted by: “benchmarking can be of limited value due to widely differentcircumstances of benchmark”. Targets and benchmarking comparisons “have notalways be(en) useful because data not always comparable.” Another airline managerreported that benchmarking partners were selected from airlines that were perceived tobe non competitors, typically those operating in different geographic markets. Recent
examples of benchmarking from the literature include Southwest Airlines learning
about the low cost model of airline operation through visits and spending time with
Using mainly
similar partners 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Using mainly
dissimilar partners
% 1 34 3 1 32 2 33 3
% ˆ 69!ˆ 9!
Note: n=3 2Table VI.
Comparator organisationused by airlines, similaror dissimilar?BIJ
12,2
130Paciﬁc Southwest Airlines in California. Likewise Ryanair spent time with Southwest
Airlines to understand how to develop a low cost airline (Calder, 2002).
The selection of benchmarking partners from outside the industry can overcome
issues of competitive sensitivity that can make access to certain information
problematic. A well reported example of the beneﬁts of this was the case of SouthwestAirlines who benchmarked their refuelling and aircraft turnaround processes andpractises against Formula 1 motor racing. The valuable lessons learnt improved their
turnaround times from 40 minutes to as little as 12 minutes in certain cases (Murdoch,
1997). Lateral thinking and looking outside the industry for examples of best practicemight assist management.
Benchmarking activity appears to be balanced between process improvement and
performance measurement (see Table VII). For some airlines the perceived need is to
develop an understanding of comparative performance, whereas for others the focus ison learning how to improve operations (processes). The balance may reﬂect the globalreaction of the airlines to declining yields, a trend that has increased the pressure on
airlines not only to manage the current performance of different business units but to
look for opportunities to improve efﬁciency. The trend for full service airlines to look atand adopt different elements of the low cost model such as direct internet sales, one
way fares and charging for snacks and drinks is just one example of process
improvements based on learning from other industry participants.
Airlines use benchmarking as much for ﬁnancial comparisons as for operational
comparisons (see Table VIII). Financial benchmarking among airlines is reported by
Feng and Wang (2000) and Doganis (2002). Benchmarking applied to operational
practices being found to be roughly equally prevalent, and is interesting as relativelyfew examples of this are covered by the literature (Zairi, 1998). Evidence frominterviews with managers showed that competing airlines were sharing engineering
and maintenance data and met regularly to share knowledge, particularly when new
aircraft types were being introduced into service (Francis et al. , 1999). Several
competing airlines undertake maintenance for each other by agreement in differentgeographical regions. The competitive rhetoric of marketing departments is put aside
More to do with
process improvement 1 2 3 4 5 6 7More to do
with measurement
% 3 28 12 13 16 16 12
% ˆ 43!ˆ 44!
Note: n=3 2Table VII.
Is airline benchmarking
focussed on process
improvement or
performance
measurement?
Primarily
ﬁnancial
measures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Primarily
non-ﬁnancial
measures
% 3 3 1 94 4 1 61 2 3
% ˆ 25 !ˆ 31 !
Note: n=3 2Table VIII.
Financial or non-ﬁnancial
benchmarking
comparisons in airlines?Benchmarking in
civil aviation
131in favour of the commercial sense of pooling maintenance resources. There was one
example of airlines within the same alliance sending personnel to check third party
maintenance by partner airlines to ensure quality was being maintained and to share
lessons learned from the airlines’ own maintenance experience elsewhere in the world.A case study of Britannia Airlines revealed how they selected benchmarking partnerswho operated in different parts of the world (Francis et al. , 1999).
Benchmarking activity was focussed on comparisons with other airlines as opposed
to benchmarking performance historically within and across different parts of their
own airline (see Table IX). This is unexpected in some ways because airlines couldeasily and readily compare year on year performance across their network. This trendmay be a further echo of the structural pressure in the highly competitive airline
market where comparisons with other airlines might be seen as holding greater
potential for performance improvement.
The signiﬁcance of understanding the implications of work processes and activities
of other airlines, particularly competitors, was further highlighted by comments madein response to the questionnaire survey. Airline management saw it as “critical to
measure how we are performing, particularly against our competitors” and “with a
main competitor we ﬁnd it [benchmarking] a very valuable tool”. Historic comparisonshad been exploited by one airline in the wake of a merger to try and capture the bestwork processes and practices from the acquired airline: “having merged two airlineswe are able to use historic benchmarking to a high degree.”
Benchmarking was equally used for speciﬁc comparisons of particular tasks or
activities and more general comparisons of general practices and performance (seeTable X)
As well as using benchmark data from agencies such as those mentioned above, the
airlines also frequently collected their own internal data. This was carried out through
a variety of methods as illustrated in Table XI. Passenger questionnaires were the mostprevalent method but most airlines used more than one way of gathering data.
In summary the airlines that responded to our survey reported a very high use of
benchmarking activities. Most of tho se undertaking benchmarking reported
favourable experiences. Tables VI to X illustrate the breadth of activities that
Mainly internal
comparisons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Mainly
external comparisons
%0 0 9 6 2 7 4 3 1 5
% ˆ 9!ˆ 85!
Note: n=3 3Table IX.
Internal or externalbenchmarkingcomparisons in airlines
Concerned with
speciﬁc tasks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Concerned with
general practices
% 0 18 24 16 24 15 3
% ˆ 42 !ˆ 42 !
Note: n=3 3Table X.
Is airline benchmarkingconcerned with speciﬁctasks or generalpractices?BIJ
12,2
132subsumed airline benchmarking. The next section presents our empirical data on
airport benchmarking.
The use of benchmarking by airports
In this section the main ﬁndings of the earlier airports survey (see Francis et al. , 2002)
are presented to give a more complete picture of benchmarking across civil aviation.Airport management has become more commercially orientated in response tochanging ownership patterns; moving f rom management orientated towards
operational goals in the past to management in the present focussed on making aﬁnancial return. Under private and more commercial forms of ownership, the pressurefor improved performance has increased; a trend partly driven by the ever increasingdemands of airlines that have identiﬁed the link between inefﬁcient airport operationsand increased cost implications (Oum et al. , 2003).
Historically airports have compared their outputs in terms of passengers handled,
aircraft movements and freight processed. Financial and cost data, airport economic
efﬁciency and retail performance has been benchmarked through a number of studies.
Some of this work has identiﬁed instances of benchmarking between airports beingused as a means of seeking improved airport performance (Graham, 2001; Centre forAirport Studies, 2001; Air Transport Research Society, 2002; Chartered Institute ofPublic Finance and Accountancy, 1980; Transport Reserch Laboratory, 2002b,Airports Council International, 2003). IATA surveys passenger perceptions of airportquality of service and allows airlines and airports to compare performance ﬁguresbetween over 50 airports (Tyler, 2000). In particular ﬁnancial and operationalperformance has attracted the interest of government regulators seeking to protect theinterests of airlines and consumers from airports oriented towards commercial success.Airports conduct surveys to examine the design level of service delivered topassengers and airlines in relation to benchmark standards laid down by IATA andICAO (de Neufville and Odoni, 2003; Caves and Gosling, 1999). The survey reportedhere sought to identify if these “results benchmarking” (see Trosa and Williams, 1996)
activities were typical of all benchmarking by airports or if other “process
benchmarking” was taking place.
As reported in Table III, best practice benchmarking was the single most commonly
used technique by airports with 72 per cent reporting some form of benchmarkingactivity. As with airlines, size seems to be an important factor. Airports with more thanﬁve million passengers per annum were almost twice as likely to engage in some formof benchmarking activity, than those with less than ﬁve million passengers per annum(83 per cent compared to 44 per cent).
Method Percentage of respondents ( n¼39)
Passenger questionnaires 87
Passenger interviews 49Focus groups 39Comment cards 62Other 26Table XI.
Methods of collecting
performance
measurement data by
airlinesBenchmarking in
civil aviation
133The airports questionnaire included similar questions to the airline survey, in
particular questions about the nature of the airports’ benchmarking practices. The
questionnaire included a series of seven-point scales similar to the airline survey,
on which respondents were invited to locate their experience of benchmarking.These scales are reproduced in Tables XII-XVI in order to illustrate the various
characteristics of benchmarking experiences amongst the respondent airports.
Benchmarking was almost exclusi vely undertaken between similar
organisations, almost invariably similar airports (see Table XII). One of the few
Using mainly
similar partners 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Using mainly
dissimilar partners
% 1 44 0 2 41 6 33 0
% ˆ 78!ˆ 6!
Note: n=3 7Table XII.
Comparator organisationused by airports, similaror dissimilar?
More to do with
process improvement 1 2 3 4 5 6 7More to do
with measurement
% 3 5 19 8 19 38 8
% ˆ 27!ˆ 65!
Note: n=3 7Table XIII.
Is airport benchmarkingfocussed on processimprovement orperformancemeasurement?
Primarily ﬁnancial
measures 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Primarily
non-ﬁnancial measures
% 8 21 21 32 3 10 5
% ˆ 50!ˆ 18!
Note: n=3 8Table XIV.
Financial or non-ﬁnancialbenchmarkingcomparisons by airports?
Mainly internal comparisons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Mainly external comparisons
% 8 24 8 21 10.5 18 10.5
% ˆ 40!ˆ 39!
Note: n=3 8Table XV.
Internal or externalbenchmarkingcomparisons by airports?
Concerned with
speciﬁc tasks 1 2 3 4 5 6 7Concerned with
general practices
% 5 16 16 22 24 14 3
% ˆ 37 !ˆ 41 !
Note: n=3 7Table XVI.
Is airport benchmarkingconcerned with speciﬁctasks or generalpractices?BIJ
12,2
134exceptions of airports engaging in best practice benchmarking with organisations
outside the airport ﬁeld was BAA plc who benchmarked car parking processes
and passenger throughput ﬂow control by examining the behaviour of Wembleystadium and Ascot race course.
A total of 78 per cent of respondents were engaged in benchmarking using
comparative performance data. Virtually all the respondents compared themselves
exclusively to other airports, engaging in what can be considered competitive
benchmarking (see Camp, 1989). Only two airports indicated that data were used from
a different industry sector for a similar function (functional benchmarking), for
example comparing data on baggage trolley availability with large shopping centres.One airport merely compared their performance with their own previously collected
data.
Some 65 per cent of airports that used benchmarking reported using it mainly for
measurement purposes rather than process improvement (see Table XIII). In theory at
least, it may be possible for many of the respondents to gain more beneﬁts in terms of
performance improvement from benchmarking in the future if they place more
emphasis on learning from the processes that are generating the relative measures ofperformance.
Table XIV indicates that on balance benchmarking was concerned more with
ﬁnancial than non-ﬁnancial measures. Given the numerous examples of “results
benchmarking” by industry agencies referred to above, it is not surprising that there
was also a tendency to focus on results more than the underlying processes. This
compares with the airlines, where there was a slightly higher tendency to focus on
process improvements and non-ﬁnancial qualitative factors. The authors suggest thatfurther beneﬁts from benchmarking may be realised if airport managers consider
looking for exemplar practices of the processes they are trying to manage and improve
at dissimilar airports or even generic examples within other industries. However, it is
acknowledged that such approaches would be more difﬁcult to carry out.
Table XV shows that both internal and external comparisons are in similar use. It is
interesting to compare this to the airlines that used a much higher degree of external
comparisons (88 per cent).
Table XVI demonstrates that benchmarking experience related to speciﬁc tasks and
general practices were fairly evenly split. This is perhaps a reﬂection of the range of
different activities in the name of benchmarking.
Overall the airports responding can be seen as having a greater tendency to
concentrate on similar organisations (other airports!) and place a relatively greater
emphasis on the use of benchmarking for performance measurement over process
improvement. Airports in common with the airlines generally reported positiveexperiences of their benchmarking activities. However difﬁculties were encountered in
identifying suitable and willing partner organisations that allowed the sharing of
comparable data, and being able to do like with like comparisons. One manager
summarily captured the feeling of many survey respondents that for benchmarking it
is:
Challenging to get needed information and to ensure apples to apples comparisons.
The growth of airport groups, particularly those that are building a global portfolio,
will mean that airports within these groups will have advantages in terms of access toBenchmarking in
civil aviation
135data that would otherwise be considered to be conﬁdential. These airports will be
afforded greater opportunity to exploit inter-airport learning.
Conclusions
The two surveys presented in this paper demonstrate evidence of the widespread use
of benchmarking in civil aviation. The high uptake of benchmarking is probably due,
in part, to the turbulent nature of civil aviation. This places signiﬁcant economic
pressures on managers, who have frequently turned to benchmarking as a means of
improving the performance of their organisations. Whilst not all the experiences were
equally successful, the tendency was for them to be considered as beneﬁcial.
Although benchmarking is widely used in civil aviation, the nature of these
activities is variable in terms of how and what information is collected and the use(s)
made of it. The move towards airline alliances and airport groups has facilitated the
availability of benchmarking partners. There are differences between the airlines and
airports in terms of some of the speciﬁcs of the benchmarking activities. This is notsurprising given the different (although inter-related) nature of the industries. What is
perhaps more surprising and interesting is the range of activities within each sector
taking place in the name of benchmarking.
Notes
1. Copies of which are available from the authors.
2. In fact ATW distinguishes between Canada, US majors, US nationals, US cargo and US
regional/specialty. For the purposes of this research these were all coded as North America.
References
Airports Council International (2000), “World airports ranked by passenger throughput 1999”,
ACI, Geneva, available at: www.airports.org/trafﬁc/td_passengers_doc.html (accessedMay 16, 2000).
Airports Council International (2003), ACI Worldwide and Regional Forecasts Airport Trafﬁc
2002-2020 , Airports Council International, Geneva.
Air Transport Research Society (2002), Airport Benchmarking Report: The Global Standard for
Airport Excellence , ATRS, Vancouver.
Air Transport World (2002), “World airline trafﬁc results – 2001”, Air Transport World , Vol. 39
No. 7, pp. 44-56.
Calder, S. (2002), No Frills: The Truth behind the Low-cost Revolution in the Skies , Virgin Books,
London.
Camp, R.C. (1989), Benchmarking: The Search for Industry Best Practices that Lead to Superior
Performance , ASQC Quality Press, Milwaukee, WI.
Caves, D. and Gosling, G. (1999), Strategic Airport Planning , Pergamon, Oxford.
Centre for Airport Studies (2001), Airport Retail Study 2000/2001 , Arthur Anderson Services
Practice, Sydney.
Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (1980), Local Authority Airports:
Accounts and Statistics 1979-80 , CIPFA, London.
de Neufville, R. and Odoni, A. (2003), Airport Systems Planning Design and Management ,
McGraw Hill, New York, NY.
Doganis, R. (1992), The Airport Business , Routledge, London.BIJ
12,2
136Doganis, R. (2002), Flying Off Course , Routledge, London.
Feng, C. and Wang, R. (2000), “Performance evaluation for airlines including the consideration of
ﬁnancial ratios”, Journal of Air Transport Management , Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 133-42.
Francis, G., Humphreys, H. and Fry, J. (2002), “The benchmarking of airport performance”,
Journal of Air Transport Management , Vol. 8, pp. 239-47.
Francis, G., Hinton, M., Holloway, J. and Humphreys, I. (1999), “Best practice benchmarking: a
route to competitiveness”, Journal of Air Transport Management , Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 105-12.
Graham, A. (2001), “Performance indicators for airports”, Business management for airports
short course presentation, Loughborough University, Loughborough.
Holloway, J.A., Hinton, C.M., Francis, G.A.J. and Mayle, D. (1999), Identifying Best Practice in
Benchmarking , CIMA Research Monograph, CIMA, London.
International Air Transport Association (2002), Global Airport Monitor , IATA, Montreal.
Mason, K., Whelan, C. and Williams, G. (2000), Europe’s Low Cost Airlines , Cranﬁeld University
Air Transport Group, Cranﬁeld.
Morrell, P., Alamdari, F. and Lu, C. (2000), Measures of Strategic Success: The Evidence Over Ten
Years. A Comparative Study of 24 Airlines from Asia/Paciﬁc, North America and Europe ,
Cranﬁeld University Air Transport Group, Cranﬁeld.
Murdoch, A. (1997), “Lateral benchmarking or what formula one taught an airline”, Management
Today , Vol. 75 No. 10, pp. 64-7.
Oum, T.H., Yu, C. and Fu, X. (2003), “A comparative analysis of productivity performance of the
world’s major airports: summary report of the ATRS global airport benchmarkingresearch report-2002”, Journal of Air Transport Management , Vol. 9 No. 5, pp. 285-97.
Transport Research Laboratory (2002a), Airline Performance Indicators , Transport Research
Laboratory, Wokingham.
TRL (2002b), Airport Performance Indicators , TRL, Wokingham.
Trosa, S. and Williams, S. (1996), “Benchmarking in public-sector performance management”,
Performance Measurement in Government , No. 9, OECD occasional papers, OECD, Paris.
Tyler, C. (2000), “Pleasing the passenger”, Airport World , Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 19-22.
Zairi, M. (1998), “Benchmarking at TNT express”, Benchmarking for Quality Management and
Technology , Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 138-49.Benchmarking in
civil aviation
137