Strategic actions and value creation: The case of ﬁrms facing crisis

J. L. Morr ow, Jr.
David G. Sirmon
Miami Univ ersity
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www. interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/smj.579
Received 8 July 1999 ;Final revision received 17 July 2006
CREATING VALUE IN THE FACE OF DECLINING
PERFORMANCE: FIRM STRATEGIES ANDORGANIZATIONAL RECOVERY
J. L. MORROW, JR.1* DAVID G. SIRMON,2MICHAEL A. HITT2and
1Division of Business and Graduate Programs, Birmingham-Southern College,
Birmingham, Alabama, U.S.A.

Firms that have failed to meet the performance expectations of investors must seek new ways of creating value or face the loss of ﬁnancial support. Using resource-based arguments, we ﬁnd thatvaluable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategies that recombine the ﬁrm’s existing stock of resources tocreate new products, processes, or technologies have a positive effect on organizational recoveryas measured by investors’ expectations. Similarly, acquiring new resources through mergersor acquisitions also has positive effects on investors’ expectations. In contrast, valuable anddifﬁcult-to-imitate strategies that provide the ﬁrm with access to new resources through alliancesor joint ventures do not affect investors’ expectations of performance. We also ﬁnd that takingactions that are not valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate either have no effect on performance ormay lead to further performance declines. Lastly, our results show that valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions that use existing resources in new ways contribute the most toorganizational recovery. 
Signiﬁcant negative outcomes (e.g., loss of investor conﬁdence, change in corporate owner- ship) threaten ﬁrms that perform below marketexpectations. These threats motivate managers,especially when their ﬁrms experience decliningperformance, to consider bold strategic actionsintended to meet or outperform market expec-tations, thereby creating value for shareholders.Because value creation is largely determined bya ﬁrm’s ability to satisfy consumers by acquir-ing, bundling, and leveraging resources (Priem,2007), strategic actions that provide the ﬁrm with‘new resources, or new ways of using existingresources’ (Galunic and Rodan, 1998: 1193) repre-sent critical paths to create value. However, ﬁrms
Keywords: value creation; resource-based view; growth strategies; investor expectations; organizational recovery
*Correspondence to: J. L. Morrow, Jr., Division of Business and Graduate Programs, Birmingham-Southern College, 900Arkadelphia Rd., Box 549023, Birmingham, AL 35254, U.S.A.E-mail: bmorrow@bsc.eduwith declining performance face increased market scrutiny. Encountering this scrutiny, many of theseﬁrms undertake increasingly risky actions (Bow-man, 1982; Wiseman and Gomez-Mejia, 1998),despite these actions having a lower probabilityof achieving positive outcomes. However, some of these risky actions, indeed, deliver value to consumers with the potential to meet or exceedmarket expectations. As a result, as suggested bythe pioneering work of Bowman (1980, 1982),ﬁrms facing declining performance are motivated to undertake such actions in order to effect an orga- nizational recovery.
This study examines the outcomes of strategic actions taken by ﬁrms that are failing to meet mar-ket expectations. We focus on the market-basedperformance outcomes of actions that are valu- able and difﬁcult to imitate and other strategic actions less likely to satisfy these criteria. Specif-ically, we compare market reactions to differenttypes of valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate actions
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
272 J. L. Morrow, Jr. et al. such as new product introductions, mergers and acquisitions, and strategic alliances, while control-ling for the total number of these same actions taken regardless of their value and probability of imitation. Beyond any shared general characteris-tics (e.g., being valuable and difﬁcult to imitate),actions taken by ﬁrms may differ in the cost ofthe resources used, ability to use the availableresources effectively, their control over the avail-able resources, the time required to deliver value to consumers, and the transparency of the action to market observers. Thus, we compare the strengthof the effects of these actions on investor expecta-tions.
In addition to advancing knowledge of manage- rial practice, this research extends our knowledge of the resource-based view of the ﬁrm (RBV). In support of the RBV, this research suggests thatthe market recognizes and differentially rewardsactions that are valuable and difﬁcult to imi-tate from those that do not satisfy these crite-ria. However, this research also provides a more
ﬁne-grained analysis of RBV logic, demonstrat- ing that the market applies additional criteria todifferentiate among the types of valuable actionstaken, especially for ﬁrms experiencing declin-ing market-based performance. Speciﬁcally, usingexisting resources in new ways to create organicgrowth is valued most highly by the market. While slightly less than organic growth, the market also appears to positively value growth by acquiringresources externally, because gaining control ofthese resources allows the ﬁrm to create syner-gies in a timely manner. Furthermore, our analysisshows that the absence of value in such actions can lead to value destruction. Thus, our research suggests boundary conditions for and contributesgreater theoretical elaboration of the RBV (Priemand Butler, 2001). This research also provides amore ﬁne-grained application of prospect theoryto ﬁrms with declining performance. While such
ﬁrms often take hasty (and risky) actions in the hope of creating a turnaround that often exac-erbates their poor performance (Fiegenbaum andThomas, 1988), some are able to produce orga-nizational recoveries with risky strategic actionsselected with care (Bowman, 1982). In summary,this research extends our knowledge of how ﬁrms can best respond to declining performance. Impor- tantly, while we ﬁnd evidence that engaging inrisky actions can lead to further performancedeclines, we also ﬁnd that when these actions arevaluable and difﬁcult to imitate, the ﬁrm can expe- rience returns that exceed investors’ performanceexpectations.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
RBV logic suggests that variance in competitiveoutcomes stems from differences in the charac- teristics among rivals’ resources and capabilities
(Barney, 1991). Speciﬁcally, resources or capabil-ities that are valuable and rare convey a poten-tial for competitive advantage. However, posses-sion alone is insufﬁcient to gain a competitive advantage and create value; ﬁrms must effectively manage their resources to gain an advantage andto realize value creation (Sirmon, Hitt, and Ire-land, 2007). Value creation occurs as ﬁrms exceedtheir competitors’ ability to provide solutions to customers’ needs (e.g., competitive advantage), while simultaneously maintaining or improvingtheir long-term proﬁt margins, thereby creatingwealth for owners (Hoopes, Madsen, and Walker,2003; Sirmon et al., 2007). A measure of value creation is a ﬁrm’s ability to meet or exceed investors’ performance expectations.
Recombining existing resources
Sirmon et al. (2007) suggest that resource man- agement involves the set of processes that ﬁrmsuse to structure their resource portfolios (e.g.,making changes to the resources available to theﬁrm), bundle resources into capabilities, and lever- age those capabilities to create value. As such, value creation can occur by recombining exist-ing resources and capabilities, or by acquiringor accessing new resources externally that arethen bundled with existing resources into new capabilities. However, resource management pro- cesses convey signiﬁcant risk; therefore, managersmust be sufﬁciently motivated to change existingresource portfolios and alter the ﬁrm’s capabilities.
Managers’ motivation to take action increases when their ﬁrm fails to attain performance tar- gets (Fiegenbaum and Thomas, 1988; Wisemanand Gomez-Mejia, 1998). Recent empirical work(e.g., March and Shapira, 1987, Greve, 1998;Miller and Chen, 2004) using behavioral deci- sion theory ﬁnds that ﬁrms are more likely to take risks when they are suffering losses or areperforming below expectations. This conclusion
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smjCreating Value in the Face of Declining Performance 273 supports Bowman’s (1982: 33) concept of ‘risk- seeking by troubled ﬁrms,’ whereby poorer per-forming ﬁrms often accept greater risks. Indeed, research indicates that ﬁrms in decline are more likely than their higher-performing rivals to recom-bine their resource portfolio and capabilities, lead-ing to alterations in strategies such as productor service offerings (Ketchen and Palmer, 1999).However, to produce desired outcomes, the recom-bination process must yield new or substantially altered but valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate market offerings. In other words, action alone is insuf-ﬁcient. To reverse declining market performance,the actions must be valuable and difﬁcult to imi-tate.
There are reasons, though, to expect ﬁrms with declining performance to produce valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate product offerings by recombin-ing existing resources. First, these ﬁrms are sufﬁ-ciently motivated to undertake strategic initiatives,instead of merely engaging in tactical changes(e.g., reducing costs) (Barker and Duhaime, 1997;
Robbins and Pearce, 1992). Additionally, because managers possess superior knowledge about exist-ing resources and resources are heterogeneouslydistributed across rivals, valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate new combinations are possible (Denrell,Fang, and Winter, 2003). Recombining existingresources into new capabilities can be especially helpful in the internal development of new prod- ucts. In turn, the new product offerings shouldsubstantially contribute to value creation becauseusing existing resources in new ways is likelyto be unexpected by investors, thus helping theﬁrm to exceed investors’ expectations (Denrell et al., 2003). Moreover, any new revenues gener- ated by the new offering derived from the recom-bined resources should have a positive effecton proﬁts because the ﬁrm can avoid the costsof acquiring new resources in the factor mar-kets.
Alchian and Demsetz provide an effective sum- mary of these arguments: ‘opportunities for prof-itable team production by inputs already withinthe ﬁrm may be ascertained more economicallyand accurately than for resources outside the ﬁrm.Superior combinations of inputs can be more eco-nomically identiﬁed and formed from resources already used in the organization than by obtaining new resources (and knowledge of them) from theoutside’ (Alchian and Demsetz, 1972: 793). Thesearguments lead to the following hypothesis:Hypothesis 1: In ﬁrms currently failing to meet investors’ expectations, valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions that recombine exist-ing resources, such as the development of newproducts, positively affect investors’ expecta-tions in the short run.
Acquiring new resources
However, while recombining existing resources in valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate ways can facil-itate the development of proﬁtable new marketofferings, especially in the short term, a ﬁrm’sreliance on existing resources limits the amountof change that is possible. Signiﬁcantly increas- ing the scope of a ﬁrm’s capabilities often requires new resources. Thus, recombining the ﬁrm’s exist-ing resources, which may also involve the minoracquisition of additional resources (e.g., computerequipment, staff members), may not be sufﬁcientto improve the ﬁrm’s performance. In other words,existing resources may be insufﬁcient to pro- duce the recovery needed. Thus, to make major changes, ﬁrms often ﬁnd it necessary to obtainsigniﬁcant levels of new resources from externalsources. Strategic actions providing for the acquisi-tion of signiﬁcant amounts of new resources enableﬁrms to alter substantially their existing capabili- ties and to pioneer new capabilities (Sirmon et al.,
2007).
A common means of obtaining substantial new resources is through acquisition (Hitt et al., 1996;
Karim and Mitchell, 2000). In addition to facilitat-ing the development of new capabilities, acquisi-tions also contribute to value creation by increas- ing a ﬁrm’s economies of scale and/or scope, and by increasing its bargaining power with buyersand/or suppliers. However, many acquisitions neg-atively rather than positively affect ﬁrm perfor-mance because of poor target selection (ineffectivedue diligence), integration (unable to build syn- ergy), or cost overruns (can be risky) (Hitt, Harri- son, and Ireland, 2001).
Research suggests that only valuable acquisi- tions, those in which the ﬁrms’ leaders workcooperatively to integrate their newly acquiredcomplementary resources (Hitt et al., 1998), are likely to enhance performance. This is especially true for ﬁrms with declining performance that must contend with increasing investor scrutiny.These ﬁrms rarely have the signiﬁcant time oftennecessary to develop difﬁcult-to-create synergies,
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj274 J. L. Morrow, Jr. et al. especially when acquired ﬁrms were selected with- out effective due diligence to ensure they had appropriate resources. Instead, these ﬁrms pos-itively affect investor expectations by complet- ing valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate acquisitions, thereby providing more immediate resource plat- forms to effect positive changes in performance.
These arguments suggest the following hypothe- sis:
Hypothesis 2: In ﬁrms currently failing to meet investors’ expectations, valuable and difﬁcult- to-imitate strategic actions that acquire new resources to integrate with current resources and create synergy, such as in mergers and acquisitions, positively affect investors’ expec-tations in the short run.
Gaining access to new resources
Beyond mergers and acquisitions, engaging in strategic alliances provides ﬁrms with access to, but not control of, additional resources from their partners that can help improve performance (Das,
Sen, and Sengupta, 1998; Hitt et al., 2000). Addi- tional performance enhancements may also accrue by minimizing transactions costs (Dyer and Singh,1998), sharing investments, and increasing orga- nizational learning (Lane and Lubatkin, 1998).
Although all bases are important to facilitate the recovery of underperforming ﬁrms, accessing new resources may be the most salient for improve- ment because it allows the ﬁrm to better leverage existing resources. Moreover, Das et al. (1998) found that poorer-performing partners capture a disproportionate amount of gain generated by an alliance suggesting that alliances can be used to enhance value creation for ﬁrms with declining performance. However, similar to new products and acquisitions, undertaking strategic alliancesis insufﬁcient to create value. For an alliance to help a declining ﬁrm exceed market expectations and create value, the combination of both part- ners’ resources must be valuable and difﬁcult to imitate, at least in the short term. Thus, when declining ﬁrms ally with partners and the com- bined resources are valuable and difﬁcult to imi- tate, value can be created, leading to the following hypothesis:Hypothesis 3: In ﬁrms currently failing to meet investors’ expectations, valuable and difﬁcult- to-imitate strategic actions that provide accessto new resources, such as strategic alliances,positively affect investors’ expectations in theshort run.
Hierarchical value of strategies in a decline context
While we have argued that each of three different strategies, when valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate, will have a positive effect on investors’ expec-tations, theory also suggests that the contributionto recovery by these strategies will likely differ.Speciﬁcally, other characteristics of these actions,in addition to being valuable and difﬁcult to imi- tate (e.g., degree of control/ownership, premium paid, need for trust, integration, knowledge of theresources available), can affect market reactions.
Valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate actions that focus on recombining existing resources to create organic growth (Hitt, Ireland, and Tuggle, 2006) should have a stronger positive effect on investorexpectations than valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitateactions that either acquire or access externalresources. This is because the latter two actionscarry additional burdens for success beyond being valuable and difﬁcult to imitate. For example, recombining existing resources to create newcapabilities that produce new product offeringsoften surprises the market more than other actions,especially for ﬁrms with declining performance.
Because creating new capabilities by recombining existing resources is not transparent to externalparties, such actions produce stronger reactions byinvestors when announced (Barney, 1988).
Additionally, because these ﬁrms are experi- encing performance declines, they often negoti- ate with potential target ﬁrms or alliance partnersfrom a position of weakness (lower bargainingpower). As a result, they are more likely to paya premium to acquire or to gain access to exter-nal resources. Paying such premiums reduces the returns earned by the strategic action. Additionally, because managers in the ﬁrms experiencing declinehave greater knowledge of their current resourcesthan those they could obtain from the external mar-ket, they are able to recombine those resources into new capabilities more effectively and more rapidly than they could using external resources. Finally,despite being valuable and difﬁcult to imitate, the
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smjCreating Value in the Face of Declining Performance 275 threat of termination by alliance partners and the integration costs of acquisitions are likely to dimin-ish their potential performance beneﬁts relative torecombining existing resources, which do not carrythese additional burdens. These arguments suggest the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4a: In ﬁrms currently failing to meet investors’ expectations, valuable and difﬁcult- to-imitate strategic actions that recombine existing resources to produce new productshave a stronger positive effect on investors’expectations than valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions that either acquire newresources or provide access to new resourcesfrom external sources.
Due to fundamental differences between the characteristics of valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitateacquisition and alliance strategies, the market’sreaction to these strategies is likely to differ.Acquisitions convey control over new resourcesbut strategic alliances do not. Thus, in comparison to acquisitions, ﬁrms face the additional burden of gaining access to valuable resources that arecontrolled by their alliance partners. Moreover,alliance partners face the challenge of fairlyappropriating any resulting beneﬁts derived fromthe alliance (Hamel, 1991). Finally, resourcesobtained through acquisition are more transparentto the focal ﬁrm (acquirer) than are the resourcesavailable to the focal ﬁrm from an alliance partner. As a result, managers can often more effectively create value using acquired resourcesthan managers who gain access to partners’resources in alliances because control allowsmanagers to more quickly utilize these resources.Thus, when investors evaluate the establishment ofalliances, they must consider the additional risksthat are not associated with acquisition actions;as a result, investors may discount their response to valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate alliance actions more than a comparable valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate acquisition action. These arguments lead tothe following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4b: In ﬁrms currently failing to meet investors’ expectations, valuable anddifﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions that acquirenew resources have a stronger positive effecton investors’ expectations than valuable anddifﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions that only provide access to new resources.
METHODS
Sample
All single-product manufacturing ﬁrms from 1982 to 1994 in the COMPUSTAT database (980)provided the population of our sample. A companywas considered a single-product company if atleast 95 percent of its sales came from one segment (Rumelt, 1974). Using single-product manufacturing ﬁrms limits extraneous variance andincreases the accuracy of the measures and results.To be included in the sample, a ﬁrm had toexperience declining market-based performance, operationalized as 2 years of at least meeting market expectations followed by at least 1 year ofbelow investor expectations (investor expectationsare described below). Two hundred ﬁrms met thiscriterion, but because of missing data the ﬁnal sample contains 178 ﬁrms.
Dependent variable
We utilize a market-based measure, Jensen’s alpha, for the dependent variable because itcaptures the value of future cash ﬂows that investors expect from the ﬁrm’s strategic actions
(Lubatkin and Rogers, 1989). Jensen’s alpha(Jensen, 1968, 1969) has been used to assess aﬁrm’s performance relative to its rivals in themarket (e.g., Hoskisson, Johnson, and Moesel,
1994). Speciﬁcally, it represents a ﬁrm’s average variance in return from that predicted by thecapital asset pricing model (CAPM), given theﬁrm’s beta and average market return. Thus,alpha is a continuous measure indicating the extent to which a ﬁrm has failed to meet, met, or exceeded investor expectations (Lubatkinand Rodgers, 1989). Additionally, Jensen’s alphacontrols for industry effects. Speciﬁcally:
By construction, alpha is expected to capture the net impact of such events [changes in a ﬁrm’sstrategy]; it measures the extent to which a ﬁrm hassurprised the market positively or negatively foran extended period of time. Further, by estimatingalpha for a long period of time, the troublesomeinﬂuence of an industry effect can be reduced.Fundamental to this assertion is the idea thatindustries are less likely than individual ﬁrms
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj276 J. L. Morrow, Jr. et al. to surprise the capital markets. To demonstrate a positive or negative alpha over a long time,therefore, a ﬁrm will have to act in an unexpectedmanner for its industry group. Finally, unlike beta,Jensen’s alpha is by construction market adjusted, and therefore no additional control is necessary.
(Lubatkin and Rogers, 1989: 459)
Jensen’s alpha was calculated using the formula
Ri−RFR =ai+bi(Rm−RFR) (Hoskisson et al., 1994), where Riequals ﬁrm returns, Rm is market returns (CRSP value −weighted index with distributions), RFR is the average risk-free rate,biis the estimated beta (ﬁrm stock price variance relative to market variance for all stocks listed on the same exchange as a ﬁrm’s stock), and airepresents Jensen’s alpha, which is the intercept from the regression model. Weekly ﬁrm returns and weekly market index returns were obtained from The Center for Research in Security Prices(CRSP) tapes, while weekly Treasury Bill rates
(used as the risk-free rate) were obtained from the corresponding week’s Thursday edition of the Wall
Street Journal.
Due to the efﬁciency of equity markets, Jensen’s alpha is a ﬁne-grained measure with most scoreshovering near zero. Thus, to ensure that the
ﬁrms not meeting expectations were clearly differentiated from those meeting or exceedingexpectations, we used cluster analysis to separate the sample into three groups. Consistent with ap r i o r i theory, for each year the clustering procedure identiﬁed one large cluster of ﬁrms
(those meeting market expectations) and two smaller clusters (one representing ﬁrms thathad exceeded market expectations and the other one representing those that failed to meet market expectations). Thus, an alpha ofapproximately zero represents a ﬁrm that has met investor expectations, while a large positive alpha represents a ﬁrm that has exceeded investorexpectations and a large negative alpha indicates a
ﬁrm that failed to meet investor expectations.
No empirical studies were found that address the time between the occurrence of lower than expected performance and the implementation of strategic actions to improve that performance.However, some have suggested that the period is relatively short (less than 1 year) (Hoskisson et al.,
1994; Jain, 1985). Thus, for the purposes of thisresearch, the 1-year period following the decline was considered the turnaround year and the results were measured the following year.Independent variables
The Wall Street Journal index and Lexis/Nexis database were used to identify announcements of intended change by ﬁrms during their turnaround year. In our ﬁnal sample of 178 ﬁrms, 96 made at least one such announcement. These announce- ments were broadly categorized into the follow- ing areas: new product introductions, mergers and acquisitions, and strategic alliances. A summary of these announcements and a description of the
ﬁrm and its competitive environment were pro- vided to an expert panel for coding. The use of a panel to rate the quality of managerial behav- ior is appropriate because evaluations of managers’ behavior ‘normally involve subjective assessments about executive behaviors,’ particularly by market analysts and investors (Gomez-Mejia and Wise- man, 1997: 321).
The expert panel consisted of two market ana- lysts, each with over 8 years of experience in major international ﬁnancial service ﬁrms. Both individuals earned masters degrees in ﬁnance and completed executive education courses in which they gained knowledge of how to evaluate the mar- ket effects of strategic actions taken by publicly traded ﬁrms. The panel members were instructed to make their evaluations independently and not consult outside sources. They were instructed only to use their professional judgment, education, and experience (along with the information provided to them) to code the announcements. They were asked to make two decisions. First, they were to decide if they perceived the announced strategic action as being valuable. Second, if they deter- mined the strategic action was valuable, they were to evaluate whether it would be difﬁcult to imitate by competitors (within 1 year). There was strong initial agreement between the panelists (78% for new products, 80% acquisitions, and 89% forstrategic alliances). Where the analysts disagreed, they were asked to discuss their differences and reach a consensus.
We also asked an independent panel of six academics with training and research in strate- gic management to rate the same announcements and tested for inter-rater reliability between the groups. The /Phi1coefﬁcients between the group of analysts and group of academics were 0.809 for new products, 0.872 for acquisitions, and 0.866
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smjCreating Value in the Face of Declining Performance 277 for alliances, which offers strong evidence of reli- ability for the coding approach and the evalua-tions made. Additionally, given that these were two different panels trained in different ways, it offers evidence of the validity of these evaluations.For the 96 ﬁrms that took identiﬁable actions,we used dummy variables to indicate whether those actions were valuable and difﬁcult to imitate or not.
Control variables
We controlled for several factors that could affect the results. To control for differences in a ﬁrm’s
ﬁnancial resources, which could affect its ability and motivation to act, along with expectations ofinvestors, we calculated slack andﬁnancial capac- ityvariables. Slack , representing the ﬁrm’s short- term ability to meet needs, was operationalized as working capital over assets. Financial capacity , representing the ﬁrm’s long-term ability to obtaincapital, was operationalized as a ﬁrm’s debt-to- equity ratio. We controlled for ﬁrm size using the natural log of the ﬁrm’s total assets.
Additionally, we controlled for other strategic actions taken including: divestment, internation-alization, total number of new products intro- duced, mergers and acquisitions completed, and strategic alliances negotiated. Divestment , or asset retrenchment, is a common action taken by ﬁrmsexperiencing poor performance that is assumed to improve performance, but may cause some harm
(Morrow, Johnson, and Busenitz, 2004). Divest-ment was operationalized as the percentage reduc-tion in total assets in the turnaround year. Increas-ing sales in international locations is another strate- gic option that ﬁrms may use to improve perfor- mance. Internationalization was operationalized as the percentage increase of international sales in theturnaround year. Lastly, we controlled for the total number of strategic actions (new products, merg- ers and acquisitions, and strategic alliances) takenby the ﬁrms, regardless of their value or difﬁcultyof imitation. In effect, these controls also operate as a validity check on the evaluation of a valu- able and difﬁcult-to-imitate action. Their inclusionenhanced the robustness of the model because boththe number and variety of actions taken by ﬁrmsexperiencing declining market-based performance may potentially affect investors’ evaluations of these actions.Analysis
Because we model the strategic actions made by
ﬁrms, and it is unlikely that the ﬁrms in our sample made these choices randomly, we useda common econometric procedure pioneered byHeckman (1979) to control for potential bias due toendogenous decisions to engage a strategic actionand the self-selection that results. Put simply, if thesame non-random, unobserved factors inﬂuence both taking actions and investors’ expectation of performance, endogeneity is present. If ordinaryleast squares regression is used to estimate modelswhere endogeneity is present, the effort will beinefﬁcient and yield biased coefﬁcients (Leiblein,Reuer, and Dalsace, 2002).
To remedy model misspeciﬁcation due to unob- served factors, we employed the two-stage Heck- man procedure. This procedure allows us to cal-culate a control variable, commonly referred toas the inverse Mills ratio, from the results of aﬁrst-stage probit model predicting the outcome,any focal action , which is a dummy variable indi- cating whether the ﬁrm undertook any action of interest (i.e., new product introductions, mergers and acquisitions, or strategic alliances). As statedearlier, 96 ﬁrms took an identiﬁable action ofinterest. Entering the inverse Mills ratio into thesecond-stage regression model removes any biasin the regression coefﬁcients by accounting forendogeneity and sample selection (Shaver, 1998).
However, proper identiﬁcation of the inverse Mills ratio requires that a variable be correlated withthe ﬁrst-stage probit model’s outcome (i.e., any focal action ), but not with the second-stage per- formance model’s outcome (i.e., Jensen’s alpha )
(Leiblein et al., 2002; Shaver, 1998). In this study, theprior performance variable (return on sales in the turnaround year) demonstrates these relation- ships (see Table 1). Thus, prior performance is the instrumental variable entered in the ﬁrst-stage pro-bit model, but not in the second-stage performancemodel (Greene, 1993). Stata’s Heckman procedurewas used to analyze the data.
RESULTS
Model 2
Values in Models 1 and 2 are unstandardized coefﬁcients with robust s tandard errors in parentheses. Th e right-most column displays the standardized coefﬁcients for Model 2.
+p< 0.10;∗p< 0.05;∗∗p< 0.01;∗∗∗p< 0.001
Hypothesis 1 suggested that strategic actions that involve recombining existing resources in valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate ways positively affectinvestors’ expectations. Hypothesis 2 suggested that valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions that involve the acquisition of newresources have a positive effect on investors’ expectations. Hypothesis 3 suggested that valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategic actions providingaccess to new resources positively affect investors’ expectations. Hypotheses 4a suggested a strategy that recombines existing resources outperforms theother two and Hypothesis 4b suggested that anacquisition strategy (gaining control of external resources) outperforms a strategic alliance strategy
(gaining access to external resources).
Model 1 shows the results of the ﬁrst-stage probit, while Model 2 shows the results for the second-stage regression analysis. Lambdain Model 2 represents the inverse Mills ratio control variable. The coefﬁcient for valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate new product actions (VINew products) is positive and statisticallysigniﬁcant, providing support for Hypothesis 1.
The coefﬁcient for valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate acquisitions (VI M&As) is also positive andstatistically signiﬁcant, thereby providing support for Hypothesis 2. The coefﬁcient for valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate alliances (VI Alliances) isnot statistically signiﬁcant. These results do not support Hypothesis 3.
In order to test Hypotheses 4a and 4b, we compared their respective coefﬁcients. There is a statistically signiﬁcant difference between the coefﬁcient for valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitatenew products and the coefﬁcient of valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategic alliances ( F=
5.75;p< 0.05), while the difference between this coefﬁcient and the valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate acquisition’s coefﬁcient is not statistically signiﬁcant ( F=0.04; n.s.). These results partially support Hypothesis 4a. To supplement theseresults and provide a more ﬁne-grained view for interpretation, we examined the differences inR
2provided by the three different strategies.
The hierarchical models indicate that of the three valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate actions, valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate new product actions havethe strongest positive relationship with investorexpectations. Speciﬁcally, the change in R
2from a restricted model (i.e., without VI New products) to the full model is highly statistically signiﬁcant
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj280 J. L. Morrow, Jr. et al.
(/Delta1R2=0.075,F=8.910;p=0.004), while the change in R2from a restricted model (i.e., without VI M&A) to the full model is marginallystatistically signiﬁcant ( /Delta1R
2=0.031,F=3.70; p=0.057). And lastly, the change in R2from a restricted model (i.e., without VI Alliances)to the full model is not statistically signiﬁcant(/Delta1R
2=0.002,F=0.227;p=0.635). Next, as expected, the difference between the coefﬁcient ofvaluable and difﬁcult-to-imitate acquisitions andthe coefﬁcient of valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitatestrategic alliances is statistically signiﬁcantly ( F=
8.24;p< 0.01), supporting Hypothesis 4b.
We also note some interesting outcomes with the control variables. For example, divestment andinternationalization both had positive effects on market value. However, the results also show that simply taking a strategic action regardless of itsvalue and imitability either has no effect or, in thecase of mergers and acquisitions, a negative effecton market value.
DISCUSSION
Firms that fail to meet ﬁnancial market expec-tations eventually face a loss of support frominvestors. To continue attracting investors and cap-ital resources, managers must identify strategicactions that either recombine existing resourcesor acquire new resources that can be subse-quently combined with existing resources to pro-duce results that exceed expectations, or at leastmeet them (Makadok, 2001). We also know fromresearch based on the behavioral theory of the ﬁrmand the related prospect theory that ﬁrms meet-ing or exceeding investors’ expectations tend to berisk averse because they frame the decision basedon avoiding losses (March and Shapira, 1987).However, those ﬁrms experiencing declining per-formance frame the decisions as seeking gains
(regaining lost performance) and thus are willing to take risky actions to reverse declining performance(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Fiegenbaum andThomas, 1988).
Anecdotal evidence suggests that investors and boards of directors have not been patient withCEOs whose ﬁrms are unable to meet investors’performance expectations (Colvin, 2005; Smithand Hearn, 2005). Thus, executives of ﬁrms indecline situations may feel pressure to turn aroundperformance quickly. As a result, some of themmay take actions without sufﬁcient analysis and evaluation. These actions are less likely to be valu-able or difﬁcult-to-imitate by competitors and thus have a low probability of improving ﬁrm perfor- mance. Approximately 60 percent of the ﬁrms inour sample took at least one strategic action in theyear following declining market performance, sug-gesting that managers in declining ﬁrms are indeedmotivated to take action. The much smaller num-ber of strategic actions that were both valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate, however, demonstrates the difﬁculty (and indeed rarity) of designing andimplementing actions that are well received by themarket.
Our results suggest that for ﬁrms to reverse declining market-based performance, their actions to recombine existing resources or to acquire new resources must be valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate. Undertaking the same type of actionsthat are not valuable or difﬁcult-to-imitate doesnot lead to recovery but instead can furthererode performance. Our results show that actions involving either the general introduction of new products or the formation of strategicalliances that were judged not to be valuableand inimitable had no effect on performancemeasured by investors’ expectations. However,pursuing acquisitions regardless of their value andimitability had a negative effect on performance measured by investors’ expectations. In other words, these actions are more likely to harm ratherthan help the ﬁrm’s efforts to improve market-based performance.
Importantly, we found evidence that certain valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate actions had a pos- itive effect on investors’ expectations. Moreover, our results suggest that the degree to which ﬁrmshave control over their resources may add to ourunderstanding of the differential effects of strate-gic actions on value creation. For example, newstrategic alliances that were judged to be valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate had no effect on investors’ expectations. These alliances provide a ﬁrm withaccess to, but not control over, new resources.On the other hand, actions involving the introduc-tion of new products or acquisitions that bundledand leveraged resources, controlled by the ﬁrm, in valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate ways had a pos- itive and signiﬁcant effect on investors’ expecta- tions.
These ﬁndings inform an existing debate in strategic management. Some scholars suggest that
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smjCreating Value in the Face of Declining Performance 281 new combinations of a ﬁrm’s existing resources are more likely to enhance performance thanthe acquisition of new resources (Alchian and
Demsetz, 1972). However, other scholars have argued that both types of action can produce suchresults (Makadok, 2001). Our ﬁndings suggestthat, indeed, both developing new combinationsof existing resources to introduce new products oracquiring new resources through acquisitions canenable ﬁrms with declining performance to exceed market expectations, as long as the action is valu- able and difﬁcult-to-imitate. However, betweenthese two strategic actions, our results also sug-gest that recombining resources to produce newproducts may produce the greatest gain. Somehave argued that organic growth (introducing new products developed internally) creates more value for ﬁrms than do acquisitions (Hitt et al., 2006).
The difference in the effects may be because theintegration of newly acquired resources is difﬁ-cult and thus entails additional costs (Alchian andDemsetz, 1972; Hitt et al., 1996, 2000). Nonethe- less, our ﬁndings show that acquisitions can create value, which supports Hitt et al.’s (2001) argu- ments that only carefully selected and managedacquisitions create value. In valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate acquisitions, the acquiring ﬁrm inter-nalizes and integrates complementary resources toachieve synergy.
In this research, we open and begin to explore the ‘black box’ related to the resource-basedview of the ﬁrm (Priem and Butler, 2001). Theﬁndings of this study add to our knowledge ofhow to achieve organizational recovery. Whilewe found that one typical response by ﬁrms needing a turnaround, divestment of assets, did have performance-enhancing effects, we alsofound strategic actions that more effectivelybundle and leverage existing resources, or newresources obtained by an acquisition, also resultin outcomes that exceed investors’ expectations of performance. However, experiencing a recovery may not be enough; ﬁrms that are able to turnaround declining performance must seek continuedimprovement. Thus, while ﬁrms experiencing arecovery move from ‘bad to good’ performance,they often desire to move from ‘good to great’performance (Collins, 2001). These ﬁrms will try to design strategic actions to build up the ﬁrm and lead to breakthroughs (Collins, 2001), while alsoenhancing the mix of resources controlled by theﬁrm (Karim and Mitchell, 2000).Indeed, the market may respond favorably to
ﬁrms that seek a series of temporary competi-tive advantages rather than a single sustainableadvantage (Eisenhardt, 1999; Wiggins and Rueﬂi,
2005). To move beyond recovery, build momen- tum, and achieve breakthrough requires furtheractions. According to Collins (2001: 165), mov-ing from ‘good to great comes about by a cumu-lative process—step by step, decision by deci-sion—that adds up to sustained and spectacu-lar results.’ Our ﬁndings suggest that sustainable transformations, at least for ﬁrms seeking to create a turnaround, must involve valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate actions that meet or exceed marketexpectations. Continuously improving, innovating,and otherwise bundling resources and leveragingthe resultant capabilities in valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate ways may be the means by which ﬁrms create defensible positions that not only enable declining ﬁrms to experience a recovery, but alsoeventually allow ﬁrms to achieve breakthroughresults.
In addition, our results provide a more ﬁne- grained view in the application of prospect the-ory to declining ﬁrm performance. Certain risky strategic actions that deliver value to consumers can produce organizational recoveries and holdthe potential to meet or exceed market expecta-tions. With better management of their resourcesby recombining existing resources or acquiring andintegrating new resources into the ﬁrm, ﬁrms canturn around their performance even if taking higher risks, thereby supporting the arguments presented by Sirmon et al. (2007).
The lack of support for Hypothesis 3 could be important. Firms with declining performanceexperience pressure from shareholders to achieveexpected performance levels. Thus, they are likelyto be the initiators of alliances, but due to declin- ing performance they negotiate from a weak posi- tion. Given their weaker position, the decliningﬁrm may encounter the ‘hold-up problem’ wherebytheir partners can costlessly end the relationshipbecause the initiator of the alliance (here, theﬁrm with declining performance) made the ini-tial investment to establish it (Hart and Moore,
1990). As such, it is more difﬁcult for them to appropriate the beneﬁts generated by the alliances.Furthermore, alliances afford less control over newresources than acquisitions. Acquiring ﬁrms con-trol the resources they buy but alliances only
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj282 J. L. Morrow, Jr. et al. provide potential access to new resources. More- over, the weak positions of ﬁrms under pressure toturn around their performance may further reducetheir access to their partners’ resources. Becauseof these contingencies, it may be highly difﬁcult for ﬁrms that have experienced a decline in mar- ket performance to realize value from an alliancestrategy.
Chattopadhyay, Glick, and Huber (2001) found that ﬁrms are motivated to respond to threats butare less likely to respond to opportunities. Ourresearch provides evidence of how ﬁrms respondto threats and the types of response that are most likely to be successful. Based on her study of the effects of strategic change on ﬁrm performance,Haveman posed the question, ‘how much does thedegree to which new activities build on currentroutines and competencies matter to organizationalperformance?’ (Haveman, 1992: 73). The results ofthis research suggest that it matters a great deal. Infact, our results suggest that boundary conditions exist in the relationship between valuable strategic actions and positive outcomes. Speciﬁcally, thetypes and characteristics of strategic actions takenby declining ﬁrms affect investors’ performanceexpectations. Therefore, when designing actions tohave a positive effect on investors’ expectationsin recovery situations, managers should strive toformulate strategies that make better use of theﬁrm’s existing resources to create new products or pursue valuable and difﬁcult-to-imitate strategies that acquire new resources.
REFERENCES
Alchian AA, Demsetz H. 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization. American Economic
Review 62(5): 777–795.
Barker VL, Duhaime IM. 1997. Strategic change in the turnaround process: theory and empirical evidence.
Strategic Management Journal 18(1): 13–38.
Barney JB. 1988. Returns to bidding ﬁrms in mergers and acquisitions: reconsidering the relatedness hypothesis.
Strategic Management Journal , Summer Special Issue
9: 71–78.
Barney JB. 1991. Firm resources and sustained com- petitive advantage. Journal of Management 17(1):
99–120.
Bowman EH. 1980. A risk/return paradox for strategic management. Sloan Management Review 21(3):
17–31.
Bowman EH. 1982. Risk seeking by troubled ﬁrms. Sloan
Management Review 23(4): 33–42.Chattopadhyay P, Glick WH, Huber GP. 2001. Organiza- tional actions in response to threats and opportunities.
Academy of Management Journal 44(5): 937–955.
Chen PY, Popovich PM. 2002. Correlations: Parametric and Nonparametric Measures. Sage: Thousand Oaks,
CA.
Collins J. 2001. Good to Great: Why Some Companies
Make the Leap and Others Don’t . HarperCollins:
New York.
Colvin G. 2005. CEO knockdown. Fortune 4 April:
19–20.
Das S, Sen PK, Sengupta S. 1998. Impact of strategic alliances on ﬁrm valuation. Academy of Management
Journal 41(1): 27–41.
Denrell J, Fang C, Winter SG. 2003. The economics of strategic opportunity. Strategic Management Journal
24(10): 977–990.
Dyer JH, Singh H. 1998. The relational view: cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage. Academy of Management Review 23(4):
660–679.
Eisenhardt KM. 1999. Strategy as strategic decision making. Sloan Management Review 40(3): 65–72.
Fiegenbaum A, Thomas H. 1988. Attitudes toward risk and the risk–return paradox: prospect theory explanations. Academy of Management Journal 31(1):
85–106.
Galunic DC, Rodan S. 1998. Resource recombinations in the ﬁrm: knowledge structures and the potential for Schumpeterian innovation. Strategic Management
Journal 19(12): 1193–1201.
Gomez-Mejia L, Wiseman RM. 1997. Reframing execu- tive compensations: an assessment and outlook. Jour- nal of Management 23(3): 291–374.
Greene WH. 1993. Econometric Analysis (2nd edn).
Macmillan: New York.
Greve HR. 1998. Performance, aspirations, and risky organizational change. Administrative Science Quar- terly 43(1): 58–86.
Hamel G. 1991. Competition for competence and inter-partner learning within international strategic alliances. Strategic Management Journal , Summer
Special Issue 12: 83–103.
Hart O, Moore J. 1990. Property rights and the nature of the ﬁrm. Journal of Political Economy 98(6):
1119–1158.
Haveman HA. 1992. Between a rock and a hard place: organizational change and performance under condi- tions of fundamental environmental transformation.
Administrative Science Quarterly 37(1): 48–75.
Heckman JJ. 1979. Sample selection bias as a speciﬁcation error. Econometrica 47(1): 153–161.
Hitt MA, Hoskisson RE, Johnson RA, Moesel DD. 1996.
The market for corporate control and ﬁrm innovation.Academy of Management Journal 39(5): 1084–1119.
Hitt MA, Harrison JS, Ireland RD, Best A. 1998.
Attributes of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions of U.S. ﬁrms. British Journal of Management 9(2):
91–114.
Hitt MA, Dacin MT, Levitas E, Arregle J-L, Borza A.
2000. Partner selection in emerging and developed market contexts: resource-based and organizational
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smjCreating Value in the Face of Declining Performance 283 learning perspectives. Academy of Management
Journal 43(3): 449–467.
Hitt MA, Harrison JS, Ireland RD. 2001. Mergers and
Acquisitions: Creating Value for Stakeholders . Oxford
University Press: New York.
Hitt MA, Ireland RD, Tuggle C. 2006. The make or buy growth decision: strategic entrepreneurship versusacquisitions. In The Search for Organic Growth ,
Hess E, Kazanjian R (eds). Cambridge UniversityPress: Cambridge, U.K. 124–146.
Hoopes DG, Madsen TL, Walker G. 2003. Guest editors’ introduction to the special issue: why is there aresource-based view? Toward a theory of competitive heterogeneity. Strategic Management Journal , Special
Issue 24(10): 889–902.
Hoskisson RE, Johnson RA, Moesel DD. 1994. Corpo- rate divestiture intensity in restructuring ﬁrms: effectsof governance, strategy, and performance. Academy of
Management Journal 37(5): 1207–1251.
Jain PC. 1985. The effect of voluntary sell off announcements on shareholder wealth. Journal of
Finance 40(1): 209–224.
Jensen MC. 1968. Problems in selection of security portfolios: performance of mutual funds in period1945–1964. Journal of Finance 23(2): 389–416.
Jensen MC. 1969. Risk, pricing of capital assets, and evaluation of investment portfolios. Journal of
Business 42(2): 167–247.
Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979. Prospect theory: analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 47(2): 263–291.
Karim S, Mitchell W. 2000. Path-dependent and path- breaking change: reconﬁguring business resourcesfollowing acquisitions in the U.S. medical sector,1978–1995. Strategic Management Journal , Special
Issue 21(10–11): 1061–1081.
Ketchen DJ, Palmer TB. 1999. Strategic responses to poor organizational performance: a test of competing perspectives. Journal of Management 25(5): 683–706.
Lane PJ, Lubatkin MH. 1998. Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learning. Strategic
Management Journal 19(5): 461–477.
Leiblein MJ, Reuer JJ, Dalsace F. 2002. Do make or buy decisions matter? The inﬂuence of organizationalgovernance on technological performance. Strategic
Management Journal 23(9): 817–833.Lubatkin M, Rogers RC. 1989. Diversiﬁcation, system- atic risk, and shareholder return: a capital marketextension of Rumelt’s 1974 study. Academy of Man- agement Journal 32(2): 454–465.
Makadok R. 2001. Towards a synthesis of the resource- based and dynamic-capabilities views of rent creation.Strategic Management Journal 22(5): 387–401.
March JG, Shapira Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on risk and risk-taking. Management Science 33(11):
1404–1418.
Miller KD, Chen WR. 2004. Variable organizational risk preferences: tests of the March–Shapira model.Academy of Management Journal 47(1): 105–115.
Morrow JL Jr, Johnson RA, Busenitz L. 2004. The effects of cost and asset retrenchment on ﬁrmperformance: the overlooked role of a ﬁrm’scompetitive environment. Journal of Management
30(2): 189–208.
Priem RL. 2007. A consumer perspective on value creation. Academy of Management Review (in press).
Priem RL, Butler JE. 2001. Is the resource-based ‘view’ a useful perspective for strategic management research?Academy of Management Journal 26(1): 22–40.
Robbins DK, Pearce JA. 1992. Turnaround: retrenchment and recovery. Strategic Management Journal 13(4):
287–309.
Rumelt RP. 1974. Strategy, Structure and Economic
Performance . Harvard University Press: Cambridge,
MA.
Shaver JM. 1998. Accounting for endogeneity when assessing strategic performance: does entry modechoice affect FDI survival? Management Science
44(4): 571–585.
Sirmon DG, Hitt MA, Ireland RD. 2007. Managing ﬁrm resources in dynamic environments to create value:looking inside the black box. Academy of Management
Review (in press).
Smith G, Hearn L. 2005. Prudential ousts chief executive after u-turn. Fortune 24 March (www.ft.com).
Wiggins RR, Rueﬂi TW. 2005. Schumpeter’s ghost: is hypercompetition making the best of times shorter?Strategic Management Journal 26(10): 887–911.
Wiseman RM, Gomez-Mejia LR. 1998. A behavioral agency model of managerial risk taking. Academy of
Management Review 23(1): 133–153.
Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J. ,28: 271–283 (2007)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
View publication stats